>> Good morning, everyone.
Please take your seats.
We are ready to begin.
And please do
come forward.
There are some seats over here.
We know that not every seat has a set of
headphones,
so do come closer if you can find an empty
seat.
Once again, good morning, everyone.
And welcome
to the open source for AI and Emerging
Technologies day.
My name is Beth Bivanen.
I work for the
office for digital and emerging
technologies.
I'm delighted to be the host for you
today.
So you're
stuck with me all day, unfortunately.
This day is really exciting because a lot
of you have been
coming to the open source activities in
the past years.
But this is the first time we're doing a
fully dedicated day on AI.
So it's very exciting to have such an
extensive program today.
So if you
were here yesterday, that was the tech
over day.
And two more, if you're coming back,
please do come back.
It will be the DPI day.
And then on Thursday, it's going to be
Ospos and on
Friday, community-led events.
So a very exciting week.
So we hope that you will be attending each
day.
This week has been months in the making.
So I know you come here for maybe five
days, but as
many of you have been organizing events,
they take a lot of work.
So please, let's give a
round of applause forMandy Snene Moritz
andOmar and
plenty of other people WHO've been working
on this for months.
Please, let's have the agenda.
So we're going to start off with a keynote
and
a fireside chat.
And then we will be doing a few setting
the scene speeches.
After that, there's
going to be a high-level session on open
source AI fordevelopment
and then a session on open
robots.
So especially you sitting on the right side
of the room,sorry,left side of the room
you may have seen there's a robot there.
So we will be talking about those later.
Then we will have a two-hour lunch break
followed by breakout sessions.
And there will be a lot
more information on those breakout
sessions before lunch.
And then we will end the day with a
session
on open agents.
And then there will be a closing panel.
Before we begin this day's program,
next slide please.
There will be a QR code on the slide here.
So please do scan that.
And this is
really an exciting UN initiative, which is
the digital cooperation portal.
So many of you obviously
work in the digital space.
So this is your opportunity, if you would
like to, to add your
projects in this portal to share your
work,the work thatyou're doing
in a global platform.
And
this will be contributing to the follow-up
of the global digital compact.
So a very exciting
opportunity to showcase your work.
Then to some very boring housekeeping,
unfortunately.
So the
microphones are set up in a way that
you can't necessarily hear everything if
you're listening
without the headphones.
So if you have a headphone or one of those
earpieces on your desk, please
feel free to use that.
That is going to help hearing.
Unfortunately, we don't have any at
the back.
So that's also why it's better to try to
find a seat in the front.
And please note that
food and drinks are not permitted in this
room.
That's why we have a two-hour lunch break.
So you
can go and get something nice from
outside.
There are, there's no food served, but you
can go to the
fourth floor cafeteria.
And if you want a quick coffee, there's
coffee in the basement.
So just
a few floors down.
There's another cafe there.
And we have some amazing volunteers.
One over here
wearing yellow shirts.
They'll be showing you around this
building.
And I'm sure you all know,
it's a bit of a maze.
So please do ask for help if you're trying
to find the cafeteria or anything.
All right.
An important note from security.
Lesson learned from yesterday.
Please do not leave
your belongings unattended.
So if you're leaving this room, take them
with you so that they don't
take them for you.
So please do carry everything that you
have with you at all times.
Last but not
least, there's feedback forms.
So if you're exiting the room, you'll see
there's some QR codes by the
doors.
So please do scan those and leave us your
feedback.
It's so important so that we can continue
to make this event engaging next year as
well.
With that, I will now hand it over to the
Undersecretary General.
I'm a deep girl for the opening remarks
and fires like chat session.
Thank you so much, Pepe, and welcome to
the open source week.
And please remember her suggestion. These
earpieces are a special artifact.
You will see them only in UN buildings.
So use them.
So let me welcome you to the second day
of the open source week, the first formal
day in a sense.
Yesterday was very exciting.
The tech
over with a hackathon, a maintenance on
and an editor on.
And we are building quite a tradition
there andI want to give a shout out to all
those WHOparticipated andall those WHO
mentored.
You
know,they have taken out time forfrom their
jobs to fly over andhelp out withthis.
So thank
you very much.
So this opening is special.
It's the first time ever that we are
dedicating a full
day to open source AI.
And there are several reasons and I'll get
to that.
I want to, of course,
you know,start by thanking our
co-hosts,WHO come from
all regions represented at the United
Nations,the Dominican
Republic,Estonia,Jamaica,Kazakhstan,Lesotho,Tanzania and
Luxembourg.
And thank you also to all the partners WHO
made this week possible.
This is a special week.
You
know,there are very few rooms asthe wags
said last year in the UN where
those in suits sit next
to those in shots and make things happen.
And we deliberately take a backseat in
terms of our
policy agenda.
So this week is not about, you know, the
policy aspects of technology as much as it
is about those WHO are actually building
the technology.
It's a conversation with those builders,
those designers.
Now, I mentioned this the first time we
are having a full day dedicated to open
source AI.
And this subject is not anymore on the
margins of the conversation.
Now it's a centerpiece
of those discussing AI.
Our expectation is that this will be an
agenda shaping day.
We
want to be able to leave New York this
week with
some guidance on how countries should
decide
which paths to take,what choices to make
aboutopenness thatwill shape WHO
gets to participate
in shaping our AI future.
Openness matters firstly because it lowers
the barriers to entry.
Letting a researcher,a developer,a
ministry,or a startup begin from
an existing foundation
rather than start everything from scratch.
It also matters because it counters
concentration.
It pushes back against the buildup of points
of failure andit counters stagnation as
well
by bringing in fresh talent, fresh ideas
into the innovation space.
But openness alone is not enough.
Excess is not the same as capability. And
for open source to deliver on its promise,
especially for development, it has to be
paired with investment in skills,
in compute and local innovation
ecosystems.
Capacity is actually the difference
between
consuming the technology and actually
building it.
So it's a bridge that connects the
consumers
to the architects, takes them across the
line.
At the United Nations, this is a very
special year
for us.
Pepi mentioned the global digital compact
2024.
So the decisions of that moment have now
been translated into practical mechanisms,
functioning mechanisms. The international
independent scientific panel on AI,so last
week,Yoshua Bengio and
Mario Ressawa here to talk about
their inaugural report.
The first global dialogue on AI governance,
which gives every country a seat
at the table in shaping the rules
forartificial intelligence
they'll take place next month
early next month, six to seventh in
Geneva.
And the secretary general would be hosting
heads of
state,heads of comment,leaders fromcompanies,civil
society at thathistoric dialogue.
So it'll
be the first UN platform where
everyone has a seat at the table to look
at the opportunities
the risks,the direction thattechnology
takes andstart the process of learning from
each other.
It's not a top-down process, it's a horizontal
facilitation of international learning
on the governance of AI.
There's a third crucial aspect coming out
of the global digital compact,
which doesn't yet have standing
decisions,standing mechanisms behind it and
that's capacity building.
There are ideas on the table including for
a global fund on AI to help the 90 plus
countries
that are most at risk of getting left
behind.
There are some initiatives by independent
centers
by member states coming together in a
network of centers forexchange and
cooperation on AI
capacity building, already more than two
dozen.
So very close to what the open source
community
is all about, but this is not enough.
The needs are humongous and we need to do
more on this third
pillar.
Cutting throughall these threads,science,policy
andcapacity is open source as
a foundational
element andwe are going to be looking this
week at everything that
can make this connection the
most powerful shaper of our AI future.
So ladies and gentlemen, now it's my
profound honor to
introduce a true titan of our field,a
Turing Award laureate
one of the legendary godfathers
of AI, whose convolutional neural networks
literally taught machines how to see.
And he was former chief AI scientist at
Meta andnow he's the founder and
executive chairman
of AMI labs and
where he's boldly betting on world models
to take us beyond the current paradigm
and the limits of today's AI, a pioneer, a
visionary and a contrarian.
So please join me in welcoming
the one and only Yal Lekun.
Thank you very much for the introduction.
Thank you for attending this
session.
I think this is a very timely event andI'm
truly honored to be here and
to tell you about
open source. So first of all, I came to
this building 18 months ago and
argued forAI open source at the UN
Security Council and
the message I'm going to deliver
today is very similar to the one I
delivered 18 months ago
which didn't go very far back then
and I'm hoping since then many things have
happened and which I think motivate more
countries around the world to have AI
sovereignty butalso to subscribe and
support an open source
approach to it.
So AI is becoming quickly a platform or to
some extent actually has already
become a platform,a platform thata lot of
us relies on andwhen I'm talking about
AI I'm not
necessarily talking aboutspecialized
application of AI butthe kind of AI that
is built around
large language models andwhat is happening
is that
increasingly AI is mediating all of our
interaction with the digital world and
with information more generally.
Now if all of our
information is being mediated by AI
systems and
by the way increasingly this is going to
become
more prevalent because
in addition to our smartphones we're going
to be running around
with smart devices like the smart glasses
I'm wearing at the moment
I can take a picture of you.
All right, I hope you smiled.
So increasingly we're going to just ask
questions to our AI
assistant which will be with us at all
times.
It will be personalized AI assistants that
here what we hear eventually they will see
what we see and
they'll become our best digital
friend.
They will really become kind of a staff
member if you want.
All of us will be
acting like a manager being constantly
followed by a staff of helpers but
those helpers will be
digital.
Now it's already happening to a large extent
that whatever we have a question we ask
an AI assistant we don't go to a proper
resource we certainly don't go to libraries
anymore sadly
and it's a very drastic change in our
behavior which
may lead to drastic changes in society.
If the information or information diet is
entirely mediated by AI systems and
those AI systems are
proprietary systems produced by handful of
companies otherwise goes to the US and
China
it's very dangerous forculture,linguistic
diversity
diversity in centers of interest
in value systems, in political opinions and
biases and for democracy, for human rights.
We cannot afford thatall of information is
funneled throughsystems that
are absolutely
necessarily biased.
There is no such thing as an unbiased AI
system.
So what should we do?
If we want sovereignty,if we want to
preserve cultural diversity
linguistic diversity
if we want people to have access to a wide
diversity of AI systems
in my mind the only way to get to
that point is open source AI platforms or
open AI platforms.
I should say open space AI platform.
Because most countries around the world
cannot necessarily afford or maybe don't
have the
resources or the talents to actually build
their own LLM.
Another countries can do this.
The LLM's
they produce are good, they're not great,
they're not at the top, they're good.
So the talents are
there,some countries are significant
resources in compute butthere is a way that
an open source
effort that
would be collaborative around the world
could actually surpass in performance the
proprietary systems.
Because in the end people will just use
the best system that's around.
And here is how it would work.
Each country, each region, each academic
institution, whatever it is
would digitize their own cultural material
and
will contribute to training a global AI
system
that would constitute a kind of repository
of all human knowledge.
But they would not have to
communicate the data. They could contribute
to training a global model by exchanging
parameter vectors, which are how AI systems
can distill the data down to knowledge.
I was trying to popularize this idea, I've
been trying to popularize this idea for
almost three years now, and I talked about
it at the UN Security Council,
trying to convince also the leadership at
MIT to play an important role in there.
But that
didn't quite fly. So after LLM, I started
with some colleagues at the AI Alliance,
which is a non-profit that is promoting
open source AI.
We decided to start a project called
Project Tapestry.
You can Google Project Tapestry.
And it's a confederation of partners that
can
contribute to training a global AI model
whilepreserving sovereignty on the data and
only
exchanging parameter vectors as often as
possible.
So that collaboratively, each region in
the world,
each academic group
each private company possibly contributes
to training a big model while
retaining sovereignty on the data using
their own computing infrastructure if they
have some.
And at the end, we'll get a system that
speaks all the languages in the world,
understand all the value systems,at least
at the basic level
and all the cultural biases
political philosophies, et cetera, and
centers of interest.
Now, once we have such an open platform,
anybody can take this open platform
andfine-tune it fortheir own purpose
whether it's a commercial
enterprise or a government or an academic
group or a non-profit to serve a
particular population.
That way, people will have access to a
wide diversity of AI assistants.
And we need such a
high diversity of AI assistant for
the same reason we need a high diversity
of the press.
Okay, now there are issues with this.
One issue is to get everybody to work
together.
The tapestry project is very much
bottom-up.
It's people WHO have expertise in training
NLMs and other AI models WHO decide to
collaborate. It's a GitHub repository.
You can just sign up.
There's no sort of heavy infrastructure or
authorizations to get.
The means and the resources are worldwide
by the participants themselves.
So that can
be completely self-organized.
But of course, there needs to be political
support for it.
If governments tell their academics,their
companies
and give them an incentive to participate
in
this project, of course, it will go
faster.
At present, project tapestry has
participated.
There was an inaugurating workshop that
took place early May in Paris.
We had participants
from several countries in the
EU,Switzerland,UK,United Arab Emirates,India
Kazakhstan,Vietnam
Japan,Korea,various groups fromacademia
andindustry groups like IBM,NVIDIA,AMD
Intel
all the hardware suppliers, basically the
main ones.
So there's a groundswell of interest for
this project and we see new partners
signing up every day.
So I see the history of AI platforms
as following the history of the software
and hardware platforms of the internet.
In the late 1990s,if you wanted to start
an internet service of some kind
the website
you would have to buy proprietary hardware
fromsign microsystems,Dell,Hewitt,Packard
andother
companies, and then use their proprietary
operating systems and software on top of it.
All of this was completely wiped out in
the early 2000s when
people started using community
hardware with open-source software stack.
And the same thing is going to happen, a
similar thing
happened also for the software stack of
the mobile communication network.
Your your cell phone very
likely actually runs an open-source
operating system unless you have an iPhone.
And it talks
to a cell phone tower that runs an
open-source software stack based on Linux.
So there is a push
by the market.
It's not just government decision.
The market wants open-source platforms
because
it's cheaper,it's more secure,it's easier
to port,to run locally if you need to
to preserve
privacy and everything.
There's tons and tons of advantages, which
is why we're having this
meeting today.
I mean, those this week, I should say.
So, you know, I think that is the
direction
of history.
It's inevitable.
Government should embrace it and
accelerate its progress.
Okay,
now there is another discourse around AI,
which is essentially opposed to this.
And it's a discourse
that essentially claims thatAI technology
is intrinsically dangerous and
should be regulated.
It's access should be regulated because
bad people will do bad things to it,
either with cybersecurity or getting a recipe
for a bioweapon or something like this.
I think those dangers are very, very
widely overstated.
I don't think those dangers are
nearly as bad as some people have claimed.
Some people in the industry and academia
have claimed.
I think the alternative,where if you
believe AI is intrinsically dangerous and
you should
regulate its access
andtherefore,open-source AI should be banned
I think is extremely dangerous
for democracy and human culture in
general, as I pointed out earlier.
But those those arguments
sometimes are justified by security
arguments, which I think are contrary.
This is a big debate
where I disagree with some of my friends
on this issue. But I think, to some extent,
limiting access to AI technology becauseof
security reasons is akin to
in the 15th century
limiting the use of the printing press
because,of course
we can control what information
will be disseminated through printing.
So I think this is akin to medieval
escuritism and I think
it's very,very dangerous to limit access
to this technology
which essentially provides access to
all of human knowledge to a wide
population.
So I'm really happy that this event this
week is
taking place.
Okay, my last point is that there is a
feeling in many countries that are neither
of the US nor China thatthey've lost the
race towards AI and
that it's now in the hands of
American industry and our Chinese industry
and there is no way to catch up given the
size of the investments are unnecessary.
I don't think that's the case.
There is a race which
perhaps many countries have lost or are
losing to build NLM-based AI systems.
Those systems
require enormous amounts of computing
power to run them
they require enormous amounts of memory
and the reason they require a lot of
memory andcompute power is because
they need to be very
large because they basically are
accumulating declarative knowledge.
Those systems are not very smart.
They're very good at storing declarative
knowledge and
regurgitating at the right at the right
time
through two questions.
They're only smart in two areas which are
very special coding and mathematics.
There they can invent new things a little
bit butthose are very specific domains
wherethe
substrate or reasoning is actually linked
to the language first of all and
second of all
if a system sort of figures out like a new
program or a new theorem it can be
automatically verified
whether it's correct or not and those are
very specific domains.
The self-improvement of AI
system does not apply to any other domain
essentially or in very limited ways.
So what's going to happen
is that we're going to have another
revolution in AI.
My new company is based on this hypothesis
that we're going to have a new revolution
particularly AI systems thatcan deal with
the real world.
NLMs are really good at dealing with
language and sequences of discrete symbols.
Not so good at
handling the real world whichis why we
have systems thatcan pass the bar exam
solve mathematical
problems and write code but we don't have
domestic robots.
AI is still completely insufficient to
deal with the real world.
So that's going to be the next revolution.
It's up for the taking
and we're not going to have human-level
intelligence over the next two or three
years.
This is going
to take much longer butthere are
opportunities forcollaboration
international collaborations
both for LLM based AI systems and for this
next generation of AI systems.
Thank you very much.
[Applause]
Thank you very much forthat opening keynote
andI hope we will all get a copy of that
picture
that you took of the room.
Please, Yandakun and USG, you can take
seats for the fireside chats.
Thank you Yand for setting this stage for
this week and you mentioned your most recent
endeavor and the work on real world
models.
So we are in this paradigm and we want to
get to
that paradigm.
Can you give us an idea of the roadmap,
what is required in terms of capabilities,
research to get us to that point?
Sure.
So current technology, LLM, as I said,
deals very well with
language andother type of data or
modalities aswe call them
where the information can be
formulated in terms of a sequence of
discrete symbols.
So human language, computer code,
mathematics, these are sequences of
discrete symbols.
You can also include in this DNA
proteins and other things.
There are things that are very difficult
to reduce to a sequence of
discrete symbols.
So for example, the state of this room, I
cannot, we don't know how to reduce this
to a string of,usefully at least,to a
string of discrete symbols
which is why current AI
systems work really well withlanguage
butnot sowell,you know,dealing with
the real world.
There are sort of, you know, things that we
can bolt on top of an LLM that allow them to
interpret the content of an image,not
somuch video yet
but it's very primitive in many ways.
So how do we get AI systems to deal with
the real world?
The good news is that we have some
ideas, okay, and systems that kind of are
starting to work.
The bad news is that we cannot use the
type of generative architectures thathas
been so
successful in the context of language.
And I'll
tell you very quickly, I don't want to be
too technical, but I'll tell you why.
If you, if you
give an AI system a computer,if you give a
system,a sequence of symbols
let's say a bunch of words
right,a piece of text,and you're training
to predict the next word thatcomes after.
You can
not exactly predict which word will follow
a sequence of words.
But we can train a machine
learning system to do is predict basically
what amounts to a probability
distribution over all
possible words in your dictionary.
So every word in your dictionary now comes
with a number that
indicates withwhat probability every
particular,every word will follow that
sequence of words
you just observed.
Now what you can do is pick one word from
this distribution, insert it into the
input, and now it becomes part of the
input, and you can predict the second word.
Shift that into
the input, predict the third word.
This is called auto-regressive prediction,
and that's what LLMs
are based on.
Works really well for discrete symbols.
If you try to apply this to video, so
basically
show a chunk of video,a few frames to,to a
system or a few seconds
and ask it to predict what's
going to happen next.
This model does not work at all.
It kind of works, but not well.
And the
reason is you can't train a system to
predict every detail in a video
and you can't even train
it to produce a probability distribution
over all possible futures of a video
becausethere is an
infinite number of them, and it's a
mathematically intractable problem.
If I take a video of this room,
and I start fromthis side,and I turn the
camera slowly,and I stop here,and as
the system,you know
predict what's going to happen next in the
video,the system will probably predict
thatthe camera
is going to keep turning.
There's no way it can predict what all of
you look like.
It's just,
the information is just not there.
It's impossible.
When you train a system to make this kind
of
prediction, you basically kill it.
It really doesn't work.
So you have to use, but what you can tell
at an abstract level is thatthere are
people sitting in seats
and I can't tell what they look
like, but there's some diversity of
origins, and gender, and everything.
So what you can do is
build a system that finds this abstract
representation, description of the world.
It's not in terms of
language, so that you can make those
predictions.
Okay?
This architecture is called Jepa,
joint transmitting predictive
architecture,and it would be a replacement for
the GPT architecture
the GPT of chat GPT, right, which is
generative.
So those are non-generative architecture.
I
apologize forif I was too technical
but basically it's a new breed of AI
system completely.
Now,
based on those architectures, you can also
build world models.
World models are quickly becoming
a buzzword in the AI research, not so much
in industry yet, but they will come.
And what is a
world model?
It's a system that would allow an AI
system to plan a sequence of actions to
accomplish a task.
So given the state of the world that you
currently observe, and given an
action thatyou imagine taking,the world
model will predict the state of the world
thatwould
result from taking this action.
If an AI system has such a world model, it
can imagine what
the effect of a sequence of action would
be on the world.
And if it asks to accomplish a
particular task,it can search fora
sequence of actions that
will accomplish this task
echo this objective-driven AI.
So this is the kind of stuff that we're
building at my new company.
And I think it's a new generation of AI
systems.
And we'll see in a few months or a few
years
whether this works out.
Most of the applications are in industry.
You can use this technique to
build phenomenological models of complex
behavior,a complex system
like say a power plant,a chemical
plant, a steel mill, jet engine, or a
human cell, or a patient.
If you had a complete model,
a phenomenological model of a patient,you
could plan a sequence of treatments that
would bring
the patient to a good outcome, for
example.
So I think there's tons of applications of
this
in industry, which we hope to develop over
the next year.
And this is a revolution that has not
happened yet.
Amazing.
So we spoke a bit about the direction of
potential travel for the tech.
I think another issue you touched upon was
the risk.
And you've been very clear about
existential
risk that these are often made up.
And there are false analogies being
brought into the conversation.
And sothat doesn't mean thatyou're careless,but
you focus more on the short-term and
the
medium-term risk.
And that's something that concerns us at
the United Nations as well.
One of the risks you highlighted was this
concentration of tech power and
the need to kind of have a
more open approach to building it out.
So what would you counsel countries that
they do not lose
sight of the risk,but at the same time
they don't constrain this open approach to
innovation.
So what's the sweet spot?
Okay, so a number of different things that
need to be considered.
At the moment, AI systems in their current
incarnation in the form of LLMs
are not particularly dangerous because
they're not particularly smart.
They really almost never
give you information that is not available
from a textbook or a library.
They just accelerate
the access to it andwiden the access
which is why people are imagining
scenarios where
battery-intentioned people will have
access to recipes for bioweapons.
Now, one thing that
needs to be considered there is that having
a recipe for bioweapon is relatively easy.
Building a bioweapon is incredibly
complicated
particularly if you don't want it to kill
yourself.
So in my opinion, this danger is hugely
overestimated.
This cybersecurity, so people say,
"Oh, look, my new system is so powerful.
We're not going to release it because
it can break intolots of secure systems."
Now,if you have a system like this that
can detect
weaknesses, you can use it to solidify
your own cybersecurity system.
So there, it's a matter of
other good guys, faster, smarter, better,
more numerous than the bad guys.
And the answer is
almost certainly yes.
I mean, it's not almost certainly, it's
certainly yes.
And so having
those systems have their own antidotes if
you want in them.
So we shouldn't be scared of this,
this kind of a first order effect, "Oh my
God, I can penetrate security systems."
Okay, two questions.
First of all, penetrating a system doesn't
mean you're going to bring down
the electrical grid or anything.
You can do this at that scale.
That's a good gen's bond scenario,
but it doesn't happen in reality. And then
second, can I use this to protect myself?
And the answer is yes, right?
So just do that.
I mean, every new technology opens the
door to
new nefarious effects by the intention
people,but generally we have countermeasures
thatappear
pretty quickly.
And there's nothing absolutely disastrous
that we can expect from those systems.
Okay, so don't overestimate the dangers.
Now, of course, a lot of people in
counterintelligence
are in the business of being
professionally paranoid.
So clearly you have to think about those
things,
but don't overestimate and sort of kill
your sovereignty because of this.
That's one element.
Second element is, as I was saying in my
keynote,
that is contrary to kind of a picture of
open access to AI systems.
And so those two things
should be weighed against each other.
That's where I disagree with my dear
friend Yersha Benjio,
whom you mentioned earlier. He's much more
worried about bad users, in particular,
bad users by even the companies producing
those AI systems because he thinks if it's
motivated by profit, things will happen. I
don't know if he's right about this,
I don't think so, but again, the solution
to this is open source platforms.
And then there is the issue, the sci-fi
issue of is AI going to take over the world?
Are we going to lose control, et cetera?
So one point about LLMs, if you believe
that
we're going to scale up LLMs towards
human-level AI
then you might be entitled to be worried
because LLMs are, to some extent,
intrinsically unsafe.
They're not really controllable.
Companies fine-tune them so that they
don't give you a recipe of a bioweapon,
but you can always jailbreak them.
You can always give them a prompt that was
not imagined by the
designers that will get it to produce, to
answer a question, it should not answer.
Again,as I said,they're not going to
invent anything so
it's not going to be information you
can't get in other sources, but it's a
consideration.
So those systems are intrinsically unsafe,
but they're not that smart and so they're
not that dangerous.
Now, the next generation AI systems
may reach at some point human-level
intelligence.
It's not going to happen tomorrow.
We have a number
of years, perhaps decades, to think about
it.
But those systems, if they are based on
the blueprint
that I described,object-to-driven AI,they
are much more controllable because
you give them an
objective andthey can do nothing
butfulfill the subjective,take actions that
fulfill the
subjective,and you can make them subject
to guardrails,safety guardrails
that cannot be
jailbroken.
Because it's not fine-tuning, it's actually
putting an objective function directly
in the inference procedure that prevent
those systems from producing unsafe behavior,
assuming their world model is accurate.
So I think there is a design for safe
systems
which I'm working on withseveral
colleagues
and there I think we have a way to make
those systems
secure.
Great,and let's move now to two quick points
aboutsomething thatmatters to us a lot
at the UN, apart from the risk versus
opportunities discussion.
One is the wider access to the enablers
of AI.
So there is this vectorized number string,
75%, 15%, 10% and then 5%.
So the compute
that's available fortraining AI models in
the US,China,Europe,and 5% is for
5 billion people
around the world.
So there is this immense concentration of
talent as well in the Bay Area,
in some of the parts of the world.
So how do countries get going in the light
of this?
And
at the same time,we are getting some food
forthought when
you listen to the CEO of IBM say that
you know all these trillions of dollars
that
are being bet on the scaling approach to
AGI.
So you need nearly a trillion dollar of
returns every year just to be able to repay
the loans.
So
do they, you know, what do they bet on these
countries that are in that 5% category?
Well, I agree with him that right now
there's a big question as to whether
the amount of revenue generated fromAI
services can justify the investments that
are being done
at the moment.
And it's not clear at all.
There's some number that was recently
published.
It may
or may not be correct, but I'm going to
repeat it anyway.
You know, a typical service professional
subscription to open AI on topic is $200 a
month. For the power users, the amount of
the cost of serving one of those power
users thatpays 200 bucks a month is about$15
000.
This cannot go on for very long. Right now
the user of AI is being subsidized by the
investors in those companies and in this
infrastructure.
At some point, the revenue are going to
have
to be commensurate withthe cost
which means either the price has to go up
or the cost of
inference has to go down drastically and
probably both at the same time.
And in the end, it's not
clear that the service rendered by those
AI systems would be cheaper than humans.
It's already
the case forprogram generation thatif you
pay the real cost of code generation
it's probably
as expensive as a human.
Some companies are kind of rethinking the
strategy about this because of
this.
So there may be a reckoning over the next
year,possibly
which would be similar to the
internet bubble crash in the early 2000s
when
companies were laying fiber optics
everywhere.
And then a lot of those fibers went dark.
And then some companies like Google kind
of
snap them up because they were cheap.
There might be a similar phenomenon where
we're going to
have a lot of cold GPUs.
And I'm sort of secretly crossing my
finger for this to happen because it
will make, you know, the training of them
are all a lot cheaper.
But I can make predictions there.
The people running those services,I think
know what they're doing to some extent at
least.
And you had a previous point which I
forgot.
Well, maybe, you know, we can bring that
point
up in the final question forour chat
today,which is,you know
what's really useful today?
Because
apart fromthis concern aboutsovereignty,what
do I invest in,the question that
comes up is
what's useful for the development challenge
in agriculture, in health, in education,
small language models, narrow AI, in some
areas, perhaps LLM.
So where do you see the most kind of
like,you know,the low-hanging fruit,the
most value coming out of that
kind of low-hanging fruit?
Certainly a lot of applications andthings
like agriculture andthings like that
are still based
on LLM's.
So basically, you know, give knowledge
information to people.
Do not require the top of
the line super expensive models.
You can do this with relatively simple
small models that you can
run locally in some cases.
So I think there is a lot of opportunities
here.
I should say also,
on the hardware side,the kind of hardware
you need for
training LLM's or training AI systems
and for running them is very different.
And there's been some success in, you
know, hardware
companies thathave been attempting to
break the NVIDIA monopoly essentially
on the side of
inference.
If you want to serve the entire population
of India
the cost of inference farmers in India
for example, they could, you know, be
wearing smart glasses.
The experiment was done actually
by people at META.
You give smart glasses to farmers in India
and, you know, they can look at their
crop and ask their AI assistant, "Is this
the right time to harvest?
What is this disease I'm
seeing on my crop?
What kind of weed is this?
Should I get rid of it?
" You know, things like that.
And this is extremely useful to them, as
long as those systems speak their language.
But the price of the cost of inference
must come down by a factor of 20 to 100 for
this to become
practical to a wide population.
So a lot of work to be done in hardware,
efficient software.
There's a lot of incentive forexisting
companies to do this because
most of their operational costs
is actually power for the data centers.
So they have a huge incentive to reduce
costs as well.
But that shouldn't stop countries, companies,
researchers to participate in this.
Great. Please join me in thanking Jan Le
Cun for being with us today. Thank you.
Thank you so much. That was very exciting.
And I'm sure that we're all now very much
looking forward to the rest of the day.
So without further ado, we're going to
move on with some
setting the stage at this.
So the first one is going to be Sergio
Gago, WHO is the chief
technology officer at Cloudera,where he
leads the company's technology vision and
innovation
strategy,aligning cutting edge data andAI
capabilities with
enterprise needs across hybrid
and multi-cloud environments. So please
welcome to the stage.
Thank you very much. Well, it's a hard act
to follow. So I'm going to try to first
bid to drum a little bit andthen set the
stage for
today on what is what we need in order to
have
what we sell lambs or world models or
robots,which are essentially AI systems with
some servo
engines on them,and what is what we need
to make sure that
that happens to all humanity in equal
terms.
Now,I was starting to write these remarks
last week
and something made it much easier to
do it becausesomething happened withthe
fable andmythos models that
made us Europeans a little
bit unable to use them.
And this made this the speech a bit easier
to write.
So imagine a future
where every individual,every company,every
country can only hire employees from
four companies
five, maybe three.
But if you want to hire someone, it has to
belong to one of these four companies.
And these four companies happen to be in
the same place in the world
happen to have the same
kind of hive mind.
They've been trained, educated in the same
culture.
And these companies can
dictate how these individuals are their
skills,their salaries even,and even when
they don't want
to serve you anymore.
Now, if you say, sir, you that is crazy,
that is not that different from
the future or present where we are going.
So we often speak as though AI begins with
a model,
right?
Open models, weights, and so on.
But it does not.
It begins with data and infrastructure.
And aside to that, institutions and people,
that's what trains models of any kind.
If those foundations
are fully concentrated,opaque,and
inaccessible
the AI built on top will reproduce all
those
biases only faster and a greater scale.
In other words, let's not start with the
weights.
That's
the tactical implementation.
Let's wait on the infrastructure.
So I'm going to try to make three
points today relatively quickly.
One is that interoperability is a
condition for participation.
Two is that sovereignty is a condition for
continuity.
And three is that private AI is a
condition for having operational
responsibility.
So interoperability is usually treated as
a
technical detail, right?
It's not a condition for freedom.
A hospital should be able to use one
storage system fortheir data,another
analytics engine
a locally adapted AI model without having
to copy sensitive data frompatients
fromone place to another or hoarding into
the same data
platform.
Our government should be able to replace a
technology provider without having to
rebuild
an essential service or public service.
And a researcher anywhere should be able
to use open
formats andinterfaces andadapt them to local
languages,local data,and local leads as
seamlessly
as possible.
Therefore, open source AI cannot mean
simply publishing the weights.
It has to
mean something else.
An open model running on proprietary data
formats, on proprietary orchestration,
on proprietary cloud interfaces, or
proprietary governance, it's a locked system.
Just has an
open door painted into it.
So we need openness across the full
end-to-end spectrum.
And private
companies and institutions have to see
this in very practical terms.
I represent the practical,
the private sector.
Open table formats.
Iceberg is one great example that the
community brings.
Open engines and catalogs like Polaris as
well.
Open source compute engines and APIs.
This is the convergence of many of the
projects thatApache foundations and
others have been
working on for a long time in the data
side ecosystem and converging that into AI.
Having
different teams andtechnologies to work
with
the same governed data without forcing
unnecessary
copies moving lots of gigabytes,petabytes
or exabytes fromone place to another and
forcing
everyone to put everything in the same
ecosystem that belongs to one single company.
So interoperability
allows an institution to replace a component
without having to change everything or
without
forcing all your data to go into the same
vendor.
It prevents today's procurement decisions
from
becoming tomorrow's permanent dependency.
So it's the fundamental element on the
ecosystem for the
future or as you'd say for the present of
today.
Now, for years, this is my second point.
Digital
sovereignty was more like a policy
preference,especially forenterprises and
corporates.
Something decidable but too complicated or
expensive for many players in the industry.
And that position is no longer credible.
AI is now a fundamental building block for
administration,
healthcare, education, defense, finance,
you name it.
So when this happens, control over the
technology becomes a matter of continuity.
The technology itself becomes the critical
infrastructure and all the elements that
are together with that.
A private provider can change
the price of a token.
This happens every week.
It can change the rate limit, retire a
model,
modify its license,the quality of the
output
and it can alter the terms of service or
decide
a particular capability that will no
longer available in a given market.
And a government
can impose,of course,an export
restriction,a geopolitical dispute that
can affect those
accesses.
So in essence, an institution or a company
that believed it was buying technological
capabilities suddenly realizes that
it only rented permission to use it on a
temporary basis.
And we just saw an example of that last
week.
So imagine that dependency in a hospital
in the
tax authority and electricity grid.
Your national AI strategy or your
corporate strategy cannot
depend on someone else's terms of service.
So AI sovereignty and private AI together
need to have
or need to answer the following question.
One, where does your data really reside?
Two,
WHO can access it and how and under what
conditions?
Three, which models can use that data or
family
of models?
Four, can we move the workloads, the pipelines
from one place to another seamlessly?
Five, can we replace the models instantly?
One to another, and the systems continue
working?
Six, can we audit and inspect the system?
And seven, and most importantly, can we
continue
operating this if a provider changes its
commercial or political position?
So don't get me wrong,
real sovereignty does not mean isolation
or outarchy for that matter.
It is the ability to
participate in a global ecosystem without
surrendering control of the essential
capabilities.
And the solution for that, well, Mr.
Lukun already mentioned that, but is open
source,
which is central to that answer.
It converts dependence on a single
supplier into participation
in a shared economy.
Now, open source alone does not create
sovereignty.
It removes the toll,
the toll booth, but it's up to us to build
the roads, up to every country.
Private AI means making responsibility
operational, making it happen.
It doesn't mean private models.
It means being open to the foundations,
but private in the operation,
essentially being accountable for the
outcomes.
Institutions cannot simply sell all the
sensitive data
to external black boxes.
They need to bring AI to the data, rather
than moving data to the AI
that comes with infrastructure and digital
comments.
They need to run, they really need to run
the
models in a public cloud.
Those are good and helpful.
A sovereign cloud, a lot of that going on
in
Europe anda private data center or at the
edge,while applying consistent security
andgovernance
of another controls across that.
So, in a way, interoperability makes
replacement possible,
sovereignty makes the decision possible
and private AI makes control operations
possible
being able to have the whole supply chain
under wraps.
Open models can be deployed privately,
adapted to local knowledge and used
without with clearly defined boundaries.
An investment in true
open source AI,and the key here is what is
true open source AI
is a key element to realize that
AI for humanity is something that we all
use.
And by AI here, I mean LMs, but also world
models,
quantum algorithms, and anything that the
future can bring us as well.
Responsible deployment requires identity
andaccess controls,data lineage,evaluation
bias
security testing,red teaming
tools,continuous monitoring
transparent incident reporting
audit logs, human oversight, and appealing
mechanisms with the ability to shut a system
down when required. All that is part of
the digital public goods.
So, we need to move from innovation to
deployment.
Many of the AI use cases get stuck in the
experimentation phase, never see
production.
This is especially true in the
enterprises,
in the corporate world, but also at the
institutions.
Our industry loves demonstrations,
creating low factor, right? But humanity
does not benefit from those demonstrations,
it benefits fromsystems thatwork on Monday
and on Friday they are surviving an audit
systems that are HIPAA or GDPR compliant.
That end to end is what we need to provide
our citizens,
and our customers alike. Deployment
discipline, clearly defined public benefit,
why are we doing this?
Legitimate and representative data,
security testing, continuous monitoring,
and a route for human appeal and
readiness.
Governments should protect rights and use
procurement
to require open standards, like the ones I
mentioned, interoperability, portability,
auditability, and credible exit plans.
Researchers, civil society, academia
should test those claims,
expose failures, localize systems, and ensure
that affected communities, big or small,
have a meaningful voice on creating them.
And maybe here in this venue, the UN can
help a lot
with creating a common ground,coordinating
standards,sharing safety resources
supporting
capacity
and ensuring countries at the edge of AI
can also become active participants on them
on the future.
So I'm going to be wrapping up, if we get
this right, and again, for all types of
models and AI, open source will not merely
be a or make AI cheaper.
Maybe this inference becoming
cheaper, as Mr.
Lukeng was saying.
It will make AI more contestable,
adaptable, locally relevant,
and worthy of trust.
AI for humanity, for all of us, means that
a teacher can adapt the system
to local curriculum
that a public health agency can use
sensitive information without surrendering
control
that a small country can participate in
the AI economy without renting its future
to a company that's valued 10 times its
gross domestic product,and that
a citizen can know
when AI is being used,for what,and understand
the basis of important decisions that
are being made.
Don't get me wrong, we've done this with
classical machine learning in the past,
so we're not necessarily reinventing the
wheel.
Open source, not just the weights, but the
content,
the data,the training,the data
platform,and the data lineage
gives us the possibility of
building a commons.
Interoperability keeps that commons fully
connected, and private AI allows
institutions to operate responsibly for
themselves and for their citizens.
Sovereignty ensures that
humanity andnot a contract,a pricing page
or a distant political decision remains in
control.
It is not technological nationalism,it is
not isolation
it is the foundation of resilient
democratic, and human-centred AI, and it
is no longer optional. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much,Sergio,and we're going
to hand it over to the next setting
setting the
stage speech, which will be given by Thomas
Jean Zombek, WHO's been having a very long
political career in Germany,and since May
he's been the Parliamentary State
Secretary
to the Federal Minister for Digital
Transformation and Government Modernization.
Over to you.
So,ladies andgentlemen,esteemed Under
Secretary Jill,so I'm very pleased to be here
and it's
very important thatyou andus tackling the
issue of open source as
the German government
be very much appreciated, and we also want
to contribute to that.
That's very important,
because when we speak about open source,
that means freedom.
It means freedom for you to choose
solutions.
It means for you freedom to understand
That means freedom for you to create
your own use cases on this solution,and it
means freedom that
you can operate it without any
hazards and without any interference from
third parties or third countries.
So, therefore, we very
much appreciate all the initiatives here,and
today is not only the fifth time that
this open
source week of UN is happening,it's also
the fifth year thatthe server tech agency
thatwe
founded asa German government is working
there,and so
the basic idea is to contribute to the
open
source ecosystem without any political
agenda.
That's really important.
Without any political
agenda, we want to prevent the freedom in
this open source ecosystem, and therefore,
this server tech agency is built independently
andcan make independent decision and
is not
under some kind of political control.
And we want to scale that.
We want to scale that in Europe.
That's the reason why we are doing an
organizational form that
brings other countries like our friends
from France,for instance,and other
countries on the place
and if there are further partners
even outside the EU WHOwant to cooperate
andto scale that
governments in a free world with
free democratic values without political
agenda want to scale here
you're highly welcome.
So,having said this,today the question is
what do we do on AI,and so
the basic constitutional
principle in Germany is that we say public
money, public code.
And beginning with the
server tech agency andall of the projects
thatare being made there
there is one project that's
the agentic maintainer support.
I think that's pretty important as
maintainers are challenged
with all the AI content that's distributed
anda challenge fortheir time,and so
I think support
here might help.
The second thing is that we built, and even
though it's not really AI, but it's the
base for that, we build a personal idea
wallet.
You can install this on your smartphone,
and for us,
it's a basic principle that
the whole source code of this central
identification system of
the government is published asopen source
sothat every citizen can see this
that we have full
transparency.
There is no tracking or any kind of things
like that, and we make it transparent so
that it's proven.
Second thing that we do is that we build
an AI platform for citizen services.
So,
we have in Germany very much on the
municipal level
we have thousands of municipalities witha
lot
of independency
but it's complicated if you want to do any
proposals to find the right place in all
of these municipal services andfederal
services andwhatever
and we're building an AI platform
with an app sothat you have a centralized
point for
all the proposals to the government,even
if
it's local or on the federal level.
This is also published as open source so
that there is full
transparency.
You guessed that there is no tracking or
things like that behind.
You can see that.
The third thing,and that's really important,and
the team's also here today is Spark.
This is a
platform for large infrastructures.
If you want to build railroads or bridges
or highways, so in
a democracy it's a pretty complex
process,and sometimes it takes years
and now we build an AI
system witha huge budget on that,and
thatcan,for instance
the first step is you need expert
reports,and you have a lot of
documentations
and it takes a pretty long time to check
if all of
this is complete and consistent.
And the AI system can, at first, check is
it complete, and if something
is missing,it can immediately make an
email or an announcement,okay
there is something missing
and it can check if everything is
consistent.
We save six months for a typical process
here,
and the next thing is we have objections
sometimes.
Sometimes we have 100, 000 objections, and
all this
from citizens,and all this can be handled
by the system
so it's really accelerating all the
processes for building large
infrastructures.
The next thing is, number four is our
Agentic AI
hub.
We want to foster startups.
Ah, so stop.
This Spark thing you can completely, you
guessed it,
you can completely download it asopen
source
and the next thing is our Agentic AI hub.
We have
all these solutions and municipalities, and
we want to bring them to the next level.
There's
a lot of legacy software,and therefore we
made a competition forstartups
and right now we started
with the first batch, 20 municipalities
and nine startups.
Also a lot of solutions, you can see
there on open source,and to explain what
they are doing,for instance
if you make a social
security claim, you have to deliver 100
pages of documentation.
What your earnings is and things
like that,and sothe system also can check
if it's complete
it can check if it's consistent,and
also it can make an executive summary
forthe public officer so
that they don't have to go through
100 pages, they see immediately what are
the core figures here in this claims.
And the last thing I
want to stress is our initiatives around
open desk and open code.
When I just mentioned that
all of this is published asopen source
you can see it on our own open source
based platform
it's open code,you find it under open
code.de,open code
and there you can download everything I
speak here about,and the thing that's also
been developed is open desk
you may have heard about
that,about thatissue there at the
International Court of Justice in Denar
and after they had
let's say,problems withMicrosoft,we could
help out,and so
they're running on our platform
and we also would invite you and
appreciate if we found furthermore users
not to replace anything
but to have choices,to have an alternative,to
not be locked intoa single vendor with
all the
things thatare upcoming,and that's not
only question of freedom or access
also question of
pricing these days.
So in the end, I appreciate very much that
today also there is this opportunity
I read in the afternoon to talk aboutwhat
is really open source AI and
what is open weights AI
a question also for us pretty relevant.
If you earn a trillion of numbers, do you
really understand
what's happening there?
So that's open weights, no we don't, and
therefore we very much appreciate
more open source AI,we are building this
by ourselves
these days is announced a German
initiative that's called Sophie,and they
are building a full LLM
I suppose it's not this frontier
LLM kind of thing,but in a hybrid
solution,I think fora lot of workloads
this is attractive
and this will be fully open source on this,
and everything that we need, I think, except
of the US is a lack of compute
and therefore the German government also
is investing and
encouraging especially private businesses
to invest more in compute
because this is the beginning
not only for inference, but also for
training and building models.
So this is the strategy that we
have in a nutshell.
Thanks for listening, thanks for the
opportunity to talk about all this here,
and if you want to join something like
this,we are not only open source
we are open government
in this case, so don't hesitate to come to
us, thanks.
Thank you very much,and we are now done
withsetting the scene and
the opening remarks of course
so just want to check the room
please raise your hand if you feel like
the scene has been set
you're ready for the rest of the
discussions, pretty good.
All right, we've also heard feedback
that it's quite difficult to hear in the
back,so to all the speakers that
are coming up next
please speak asclose to the microphone
aspossible,I'm practicing what I preach
and also if you
came a bit late,please note thatthere are
ear pieces
you can use those to hear better,and in
the back there aren't any,but I believe
that
you can connect your own headphones to
those machines
so let's try withthat anddo let us know if
they're still having difficulty hearing
and we'll look
into it.
All right,on to the next session,so let me
introduce the moderator,I actually don't
see whereArena is sitting,but
please,Vireena Conchiter,sorry
Chief Executive Officer of
OpenData.sh,please welcome to the stage to
moderate the session on open source for
digital
development.
We are not seeing Vireena.
All right, I will, in the meanwhile, hand
it over to our
colleagues to start off the session. All
right, we have a volunteer, Medice Nene.
I have two, I have two.
Are we sitting there, sitting, sitting
over there, do you have the list?
I feel like this is what the tech takeover
actually was preparing us yesterday.
Thank you so much, so let me find a good
chair,
and invite,oh,I have a lot of laptops
andthen screen andthen I,yeah,yeah
that's good.
So let me invite our distinguished guests
today forthe discussion about
open source AI
and development.
We'll have a very high level and
ministerial session today with distinguished
minister Salima Bay, that I invite her to
join the panel.
I hope that she is in the room.
Sierra Leone Minister of Dil, thank you so
much.
Please, yeah, yeah.
I'll stand up so I gave you
space to go on, you know.
These are last minute adjustments.
Thank you so much.
Thank you so much,
Minister, Minister of the Responsibility for
Efficiency, Innovation and Dil from Jamaica,
her Excellency, Audrey Marks, please join
us.
And Minister delegates to the head of the
government forDil Transition andAdministration
Reform fromMorocco,her Excellency
Amalie
Valleh Sagrushni, please join us on the
panel.
Oh, thank you.
Please, oh, oh, yeah, we will put
names, yeah, for you. Sorry for last
minute adjustment.
This is very tight space, yeah, and it's
hard today.
Yeah, yeah, that's fine.
I gave it back to you.
Oh, very much.
How are you doing?
Yes, please.
Very nice to meet you.
Yeah, thank you.
We are very happy today to host you,to
show firstly that
the gender problem is not a real
problem.
And it's we have top leaders in the words
coming
leading their digital transformation
digital reform,AI strategy in three
countries talking today,their own reality
how they can
really do better than men because we have
failed it.
It was supposed to be a woman moderating
decision.
Please don't judge me on my physical
aspects. So, and I'm happy to introduce
the three ministers talking mostly
aboutthe open source AI anddevelopment and
the vision
that we need to build around that.
From the top levels vision, from a
strategic vision,
from policy makers visions
how this is could in bring this
advancement in the AI adoption
into digital reforms,into the digital
transformation within government
within public services to
reach at the end,where the goal is to reach
the citizens providing better services
providing
lower cost in terms of services, but also
ensuring that the countries are upscaling
and are not leaving that gap, getting bigger
and bigger with all these AI advancement.
So, I'll start with all of you with the
same questions, and I would like to get
firstly how is open source integrated into
your national digital transformation or AI
strategy
and then if you have any concrete case
that have delivered measurable outcomes.
We all know that
we are talking about AI outcomes.
It's very hard to measure the AI outcomes.
So, I want to hear
from three ministers today how we do that.
Your Excellency, Mr. Amen. Please.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Very happy to join this very important
discussion on open
source and in particular in the domain of
artificial intelligence.
We have been working on open source
many decades before,but the rising of AI
bring new challenges when
it comes to open source.
For example,for many decades,open source
was like giving the source
the code of the software
and then everybody was able to improve, to
add, to remove, etc.
But when it comes to artificial
intelligence sources,the question is quite
different because
you don't need only the code.
You need many,many other parameters
andfeatures thathelp you to find in the models
to work on
the model,to work on the data,to work on
the tokenization
and you can open some aspects.
If you close some others, you cannot really
speak about open source. So, in Morocco,
as Minister of Digital Transition Reform
Administration, I can say two things.
The first one is when
it comes to digital,pure digital,we have
the same advancement as
any places in the world.
But when it comes to artificial intelligence,
I think we started from, we came from far,
we started a few years ago, working really
on artificial intelligence.
We deployed many efforts
to develop AI, and what we can propose to
our developers is two things.
Data factory,
we have two concepts.
The concept of data factory and the
concept of forge of sources.
This means that people can first learn how
to deal with data to be used in their
codes, AI software.
And the second is to mutualize somehow the
development of algorithms
within the country, but also we are open
to the world. We use other
get-ups, et cetera, to bring and to take
benefit from development in other countries.
So,today,when it comes to AI,we are at the
very beginning of the process
to be honest.
But we know exactly what we have to do
andhow we can do it
because we have this experience of
developing algorithms for labs, I would say,
not to scale for the public administration
or the other companies.
But it's going very fast, and we do a lot
of activities around
open source in AI, and I have two minutes,
I think. I still have time.
So, if I would like to summarize very
quickly the most important
obstacles, the first challenge for us is
the fragmentation. For a while,
many administration were developing codes,
algorithms, et cetera.
And if you would like to have
something coherent,in particular
when you tackle the question of
interoperability between
administration,you should have more deep
knowledge on the pieces that
exist in different places.
The second challenge is data readiness.
For a while, also, we had many papers
everywhere
in the world.
I mean, not only in Morocco, but I think
in Morocco and Africa, it's still
a huge challenge to move frompapers to
have real data,processing data,to move from
papers
to processing data.
And maybe the third challenge is
sustainability, because for most people,
open source is seen as volatile sources. I
mean, there is no maintenance, nobody can
provide support when you use the open
source, et cetera.
So, this may introduce some fairness
in some fear in the process of development
of AI and based open source AI.
And we try to,
this is why we put this forge
because we need some safeguards to bring
to the table this open
source,to be able to make the added value
on these sources
but also to provide some guarantees
that it will work and
somebody somewhere will take care of the
advancement of this source.
And of course,the last but
not least challenge we face is the
challenge of confidence
the trust.
We think all the time about trust for the
AI, when it comes to open source,
it's a worst.
People have to trust that the source is
solid, the source is resilient,
the source is not full of pitfalls, for
example, in the development of the source.
So,we have also to work on the trust
toward the use and
the integration of open source in
a huge development.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Excellency.
It's the trust, indeed.
It's a big
problem when it comes to the open source
community.
I remember that, meaning as a single
developer,
it was a big trust issue.
Now, if we take it forwards to the level
of society, citizens,
and public services, and then in
particular with the RISE of the AI.
And I'm looking at you,
Excellency, Honorable Ms. Audrey Marks.
I'm asking it's about that trust issue that
just Ms.
ML was raising.
We know that AI bring a lot of attention
and spot the lights
on the open source, in particular.
And then that's why we are organizing
evenly that day.
How is the awareness,the raise of the
awareness
the uptake of the considerations of the
open
source within the government, but also at
the societal level is happening?
Thank you. Let me first say good morning
to all the Secretary General Gill,
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen. Mr.
Moderator, you have spoiled my opening line,
you're supposed to be madam of our
moderator.
I was fascinated that we had all female
ministerial
panel, but we will work with you.
So for Jamaica, open source AI is
fundamentally a capability issue,
not just a technological one. As we
accelerate our digital transformation,
we have moved beyond viewing open source
merely as a cost-saving measure.
AI has fundamentally
shifted our perspective.
We now recognize open source as the
essential mechanism to inspect,
adapt, secure, and govern our technology.
Our vision is clear.
Jamaica must not simply
be a consumer of global technology, we
must be active builders.
This requires a concerted effort
to cultivate data foundations,specialized
skills,robust safeguards
and public sector capacity
so that Jamaicans can fully participate in
the global AI economy.
To date, we have laid a strong
groundwork withseveral major open source
and
open data government initiatives alongside
nine
significant AI policy programs since 2011.
Our progress is accelerating rapidly.
We have
established the National AI Task
Force,completed UNESCO AI Readiness Assessment
and launched the
National AI Lab andwhat we call a gains
program,growing AI innovation and
national skills.
We are driving implementation through
mandatory training of our public workers,
and AI initiatives in health, and targeted
AI pilots.
Our existing foundation, including the
decan-based open data portal,data
fordevelopment,OpenEMIS
and DHIS to cancer surveillance
demonstrates our commitment to open
source.
Moving forward, Jamaica's message is
simple.
Open source AI must build enduring
capability,not dependency
enabling us to serve our citizens
better, protect trust, and create lasting
Jamaican-owned value.
Thank you, Mr.
Moderator.
Thank you so much.
That's very impressive.
I know about the capacity building issues,
the skills issues.
I'm trying to do a lot of that.
It's very good to hear how far have you
gone into that.
I'm looking to our last panelist, not the
least, your excellency, Salima Bab, Mr.
from Sierra Leone.
I have been there once, yes, I have been
there once with great colleagues working
on AI strategy,helping and
trying to understand how we can support
them at some point.
I'd like
to get a better vision from you.
You are the top leader there on the dealer
in AI.
How is AI
in open source going in Sierra Leone?
Thank you.
Thank you very much for that.
I'm always excited
to hear people have been to Sierra Leone.
It's mean you've crossed the boat.
You have interesting
stories to share, I'm sure.
But really, again, I want to join my
colleagues in thanking the
Undersecretary forputting together this
really critical conversation and
really everybody that's
here.
I really believe whenit comes to
advancements of digital transformation,really
these are
the conversations we need to be able to
have a bit more critical.
I think specifically when we
think aboutopen source andopen source AI
now,as we're discussing
I believe the experience of
Sierra Leone or specifically our vision or
whenwe think aboutit
I think could be an illustration
for a lot of countries to be able to also
think throughand we're happy to work with
other people
to see how we can also further advance
that.
Because when we think about it, we think
about the
potential to change the economics of
digital transformation.
I think any country that sits on
and think aboutyour digital transformation
agenda andjourney
one of the hugest implications within
that is the cost implications of all of
that.
And if we think about African countries
being in on
this journey andforever long working
withour partners to transform asmy colleague
fromMorocco
mentioned in Africa, a lot of our
processes are still paper-based.
So we know everybody's working
to be able to transition thatbecause we
want more accountability and
transparency in terms of
government service delivery andhow we
operate and
we know technology is critical towards
that.
But we look at what's been the biggest
challenges towards that
is some of it is the cost implications.
We look at building or procuring
proprietary andbase systems when
you're vendor-locked andnot having
those finances to keep up withthose annual
licensing-based subscriptions and
you realize
it's almost like you're entering a trap
and then you keep on going and going.
It sometimes
feels there's no way out of that.
That's why we believe open source is a
great opportunity to
change that reality that we have. And then
maybe also most fundamentally, one of the
when we look at it,especially across the
region
we see different African countries
building the
same solutions all using the potential
limited resources that
we have building the same things
at the same time when we don't need to be
doing that.
So that's why Sierra Leone has always seen
open source asone of the biggest game
changes whenwe think about
digital transformation and
specifically for developing countries such
as ours.
The idea that we don't have to build the
same
thing,walk the same road thatsomebody else
has already done
we can take what is there andbuild
on top of it,improve on top of it,contextualize
it forwhat we need in Sierra Leone.
That has always
been critical.
That's why Sierra Leone is a founding
member of the DPG alliance.
We're very proud
founding member of that alliance being able
to have a seat at that table to be able to
contribute to the global advancements of
DPG and we think it's critical.
That's why we see
in Sierra Leone has always been a home to
some of the
we see some of the biggest open source
solutions right now,DHIS2 actually was
piloted in Sierra Leone when
it started open G2P was piloted
in Sierra Leone becausewe wanted to create
thathome where
open source software was welcomed and
it could be a place wherethis could be
tested andscaled from
because we want to provide that
opportunity.
And we're further doubling down on this
commitment to open source.
I'm actually
recently supported by UNICEF andsome of
our other partners WHO
have developed the first open source
first policy.
And really what this means is to say that
in Sierra Leone, before we consider any
proprietary based solution,we will consider
an open source asour first priority as
our first
and go to only if we can't find an open
source alternative thatwe can contextualize
andwork on
then we'll look at a proprietary solution.
And this has been great for us because
issues of fragmentation
as already everybody mentions issues of
these siloed systems
issues of sometimes these proprietary
systems not really being contextualized for
really
our needs.
Sometimes we find ourselves with these
proprietary systems, we utilize them,
but there's lots of difficulties within
them because they weren't built for us.
So getting
them to work forus sometimes is really
difficult andalso the issues of sustaining it
andissues
of sovereignty really I think if we look
at the digital landscape andwhere we are so
for us
open source has been critical.
And I think how our commitment and our
vision towards this can
also then translate to whenwe talk
aboutopen source AI and
I like to say it also provides
the opportunity to democratize intelligence
becausewith open source AI it means that
everybody
can contribute andbuild towards this frontier
in terms of wherewe're going through.
So really
in a nutshell I would say forSierra
Leone,open source has been critical
we're doubling down
on our commitments towards it andone of
the areas in which
we're doing this actually is we're
building a DPG pipeline becausewhen we
think about
the advancement of open source sometimes
within the region we feel asif it could
appear asif it's this thing being done to us
andnot
being done with us.
So we're looking to how do we create
opportunity to have how do we converge,
demand, talent and resources when we think
about open source and for the region.
So again supported
and partnership withUNICEF andwe're
developing this DPG pipeline platform that
we believe can
provide thatconvergence not just forSierra
Leone butwe think it could be a tool that
could really
support the advancement of DPG within the
region because
again one of the things we want to be
able to change is sometimes the perception
of DPGs are open source it's free.
Free means cheap
means bad andwe're trying to change
andthat night's ever really we change that
by getting more
of our local talent contributing towards
this and
building towards this the platform of
itself
is open source as well so invites others to
further improve upon it and build upon it
and contextualize it for their needs as
well.
So within that we think the open source
framework
is building the foundation we think within
AI as
well the work we're doing we just
developed an
AI readiness assessment because
before moving to an AI strategy we wanted
to be able to understand
where what role does Sierra Leone want to
play in this whole AI revolution what is
thatcomparative
advantage a comparative advantage might
not be building the AI based infrastructure
it might be
looking at the data sets andhow we're
contributing andtowards that
want to be able to define what
our role is going to be andhave a focus on
how we achieve thatbecause for
countries such
as Sierra Leone thatis important we don't
have unlimited resources with
the resources we do have
want to be strategic in how we utilize it
andhow we and
how we contribute to the global
advancement
and of AI sowe're working throughthat
process andas mentioned and
we look to also provide
regional leadership as
the current chair of ECOWAS Sierra Leone
is the current chair of the ECOWAS
so I also chair the ECOWAS ICT council we
just had a ECOWAS ICT council meeting some
of the
conversations were around as
a regional perspective how is West Africa
what comparative advantages
West Africa have andhow are we able to
come together as
mentioned our biggest challenge is
fragmentation we believe within the region
there's opportunities to leverage shared
infrastructure
rather than every country building their
own GPU every country building their own
data sensors
which we might not have there's an
opportunity as
a region to come together to see how in
the
two sense of the world make infrastructure
also open in that
sense why every other country then
would M6 to see how their own comparative
advantages could be so
lots of progress being made but
still lots more to do andI'm looking
forward to working with
all partners to see how we further
advance us thank you thank you so much
that was very comprehensive covering
entirely the value chain of AI from
the governance to the
data centers at the end thank you so much
just to raise a point in related to the AI
adoptions andopen source we have seen
thatmany strategies are coming towards when
we talk about
sovereignty is aboutpushing more the
private sector to take the lead on that
because that's a
fundamental piece in the in the thinking
aboutAI butwhen it comes to the AI and
open source how
to convince and
bring up startups building their autonomy
building also a partial sovereignty of
the member states on on AI it's a bit more
complex becauseit's a mix of things that
are coming inside
and things coming getting outside so
with the arrays of these big startups or
private economies
we've seen in China I've seen in the US
we've seen in Europe a lot of investment
state investment
into these startups to build that
ecosystem to bring the agility to bring
the innovation
capability butalso to bring the ecosystem
inside becauseAI is good getting benefits
fromAI is
much better I know there's a lot of
countries running towards the startup act
building this
and building the ecosystem but when it comes
to the AI I'm looking at a new minister
Amelthala how Morocco is doing meaning I
know it's very vibrant ecosystem but
how bringing the AI
component inside of thatecosystem of
startups yes for
this valuable question first I would like
to
just recall that
in Morocco our digital strategy 2030 has
two main pillars the first one
is digital economy andthe second one is
the reform of administration and
both work together
because when
you work on digital economy you need laws
you need procedures you need not many
things thatneed thatrely on the
administrative procedures so
we need advances in administration
to go ahead with digital economy and also
we need digital economy to advance the whole
stuff in an administrative area so
in Morocco this digital economy is can be
articulated on
two or three axes the first one is
offshoring outsourcing if you want and
we attract many many
companies more than 1,200 companies over
the world big companies that
invest in Moroccan talents
and develop AI within Morocco just to give
you a more comprehensive view today we
have 143
jobs created by outsourcing in Morocco andof
course to do thatwe need incentives and
we need
a very vibrant startups very vibrant
development etc so
when it comes to developing AI I mean I
think the champions or the leaders of AI
in Morocco are startups today and
these startups are of course
developing new technologies new solutions
and
try to collect to connect these solutions
to the big
stakeholders including the companies
thatprovide this outsourcing so
we try to have the whole chain
from development to a startup to big
companies to export digital and
one of the biggest incomes
of Morocco in digital economy is a digital
export of this kind of solutions
developed by startups and
in the context also offshoring we have two
big programs called related to venture
building and
venture capital more than one dot three
million of dirham which
means one dot three billion of
dollars dedicated to this developing to
develop the startups solutions and
very recently
last Friday we got the the opportunity to
develop also this ecosystem by I mean the
World Bank helping
us by two hundred two hundred fifty
million dollars which
include two hundred millions for
startups anddigital ecosystem sothis means
thatwe have today approved that
moroccan startups can
provide a very helpful solution to the
rest of the world and
this make World Bank trust in this
development within morocco so
we develop also we have very I think
something very new in the area
of ecosystem called institute jazari
whichwhich are physical spaces that
put together researchers
startups stakeholders to develop open
source solutions and
this jazari institute are spread
on the country we have 12 andthey are
specialized by region and
by the provide solution forregions
for example in the south we have problems
withwater sowe will specialize with
jazari in water
in other area that will be energy in other
one is industry and so on and we create this
network of jazari institute withmore than
one gigawatt capacity of compute so
today we invest
in data centers we invest in compute we
invest in talent and
we invest in startups to build this
ecosystem at large scale I think what is a
very important formorocco and
we will have some events
during this week in particular withUNDP
morocco is today chosen asa hub fordigital
andartificial
intelligence hub forAI anddata
forsustainable development within africa and
Arab state sowe
try to provide solutions thatcan scale at
the regional level and
not only at moroccan level so
our ecosystem is very vibrant we have very
brain mind in mathematics in algorithmic
etc
andwe are
very confident whenit comes to talents in
morocco thank you thank you so
much that's very impressive
that you are at that
precise in the articulation of the impact
in job creations this is the first
time I hear thatof very precise numbers
andI was wondering how can we do that
the same thing for
AI andsay oh the AI is bring thaton GDP or
on the job creation but
that's another another discussion
your excellency Audrey meaning it's it's
the same question in different region it's
this the startup
the ecosystem the market butalso the open
source how this could contribute to faster
andbuild a
better eco startup and
innovation ecosystem thank you open
technologies are important enabler of
Jamaica's AI startups and
wider innovation ecosystem the lower
barriers to entry speed up
experimentation andgive developers access
to advanced tools andknowledge that
would otherwise
be costly or difficult to obtain
especially forstartups so
this allows entrepreneurs to build
an existing innovations rather than starting
fromscratch improving time to market
andcompetitiveness
however the challenge thatwe we have to
note andrecognize is that
well open source reduces
license costs it introduces other
considerations such asa need for
local technical capability
ongoing maintenance and
in some cases vendor or community support
these operational factors
must be planned for
to ensure sustainability in Jamaica's
context the strongest approach is
combining open standards secure APIs and
shared public digital platforms to create
a foundation
for innovation andI'm very pleased to
share that
back in April this year we were able to
launch
Jamaica's data exchange platform soyou
know it's very easy for
governments the different
departments andagencies of governments to
operate withtheir own data but
we are now cutting out
the silos and ensuring that we have shared
data which will not which will also provide
a common area for
entrepreneurs to access data this enable
enables developers across sectors
such as agricultural tourism education and
government services to build solutions more
efficiently whilecontributing to more
connected and
scalable national innovation ecosystem
thank you mr moderate thank you so much
your excellency it's mini please yeah
probably the data exchange is the hardest
part to achieve in particular when
it comes to
how it's very siloed across a different
administration I don't know if you are
pushing the I mean it's I'm asking because
I'm I'm really curious to know are you
making the data
also available forstartups it's secure
data so
there there will be a process we are
starting with
government government departments
andagencies and
we have not put in a data protection
system
and our companies even startups will have
to register andgo through
a certain compliance
to ensure thatdata is protected andthen
there will be access and
especially especially important
for the banking system in Jamaica at this
point is still relatively complicated to
get bank accounts
you have to go andget references andshow a
number of documents with
we are doing two things we are
doing the data exchange platform and we are
also doing a national identification card
so every Jamaican will have a national
identification card which will be the one card
now withwith withthe national identification
card whichhas whichhas already gone
throughthe
process of verifying your identity andthe
data exchange we are combining both so
that to make
it easier foryou to open a bank account
andfor startups to be able to identify WHO
they are
working withand be able to get going much
quicker that's setting the stage for
tomorrow discussion
of the public infrastructure thank you
thank you somuch your extension so
i'm looking at
your extension on the startup meaning i
don't know much to be honest on on startup
ecosystem in Sierra
Leone i'm happy to hear a little bit more
and
then again how is open source could help
building a
stronger startup ecosystems in in AI at
least thank you thank you very much i really
like
quite conversations around the private
sectors andrural responsibility and
towards this because
i feel as
if sometimes within this government government
i think sometimes we have to central
this where
we always need to be in the private sector
role i think specifically on startup
ecosystem in Sierra Leone i think as
might be expected it's a nascent stage
capacity is building
we're seeing the development of VC
andfunds coming in so
you can i think it's always a good
indication whether your ecosystem is is
developing is whenyou see funding coming in
becausethat's
that's always will determine whether the
investors see this as
a viable ecosystem to invest in so
we're seeing a lot of thatso we're
encouraged by that
but you know within this framework and
as i really liked the questions or responses
around the impact of AI andbecause when
this
conversation we're not AI is not for
AI sake right we're looking at how AI can
improve health care
how AI improves finance how it improves
agriculture how it improves mining how we
really transform
and change aspects of our lives andfor the
better right sothat's really the gain and
and within
all of this andwhy these conversations are
happening so
but then it's also critical then to
discuss what's the role andthe responsibility
of private sector becauseif we think
aboutthe
impact andthe potential of AI and
i really would like to take it even beyond
our local
ecosystem wherenow the world is a global
village andwith technology and
these systems now it's
really a one one part whichwe're all in
especially when
it comes to the impact social media AI
determines what you find out about
Sierra Leone today if you go on Facebook
algorithm has decided
the most interesting thing aboutSierra
Leone today is this andall the way from
the years that's
what you get to see thatis influencing
your opinion abouta specific country region
andhas real
life impact whenit comes to financial if
you see a great story that
portrays the security and
advancement of Sierra Leone as
an investor you might think great place to
go invest if you see a
story aboutinstability security risk
andinvest on me this side that's not where
i want to go
invest my money so
this is a real life impact health care AI
now is determining global health
outcomes and and and and and how how it runs
so there's real life impact and within that
i believe the private sector has a critical
mm role to play when we talk about lack of
representation andand within it andif we're
really going to see the opportunity for
AI to
actually reach its full opportunity
andpotential thatit has we really need to think
aboutwhere
does the obligation when
it comes to ensuring representation lie is
it just the sole responsibility
of countries andgovernments to push andand
and
and figure this out or do we is this a
collective
responsibility within thatbecause can AI
models thatare not fully that
doesn't understand the
full context of full humanity or asa whole
can that
actually be an intelligent system can we
claim
that to be fully intelligent if it doesn't
understand andtake into
consideration every aspect of
this soi i i believe within this whenit
comes to impact and
the private sector i do think we
should have a more collective conversations
around how do we asa collective andand
andand contribute
to this because
that's the only way AI of itself would
really achieve its full potential andof
what it can do forhumanity andfor the
advancement and
of the of of of our shared agendas aswell
and i'll really end it by saying
specifically when
we look at the global digital compact
thatwas
signed with
private sector partners big tech private
sector partners being parties to that
one of the critical things we talk about
is digital cooperation how do we really
ensure
everybody is well andrepresented so
i think within these conversations i think
i want to
like to see more conversations with
i would have liked to see one or two
private sector partners
here maybe aspart of this panel because
i think those are the conversations we
need to have
for AI andopen source andall of these i
were talking about
of all of it to achieve the full
impact and and and opportunity for
humanity thank you thank you so much
thank you somuch so
i'm i'm offering you two options we
continue questions or we take one
question fromfrom the the audience it's up
to you to decide and
i think it's good to hear from
from the people WHO are participating is
there any question before
ah if you don't have questions that will
be very hard oh we have one i can see it
okay we have a question there anyone could
help with a microphone yeah
and a shot question please and if you sit
by and microphone you can press the button
and use it so the gentleman back there
so it's not working i'll come to you
thank you somuch really appreciate the
conversation my name is esan shayagan i work
witha
nonprofit community center data andresearch
institute in washington state um so
the conversation
of contextualization and
also building a shared infrastructure came
in this conversation in this
discussion whichwas very interesting
andfascinating um i i have a question about
like you know how
can whenwe talk about
the contextualization of the models or the
infrastructure um can you talk
or share some of the samples of the work
or the project thatyou guys are doing and
also how can we
have a shared infrastructure whenwe were
have whenwe were talking about
you know contextualization
so this was the basically the question
thank you i really appreciate it thank you
we will start withthe kingdom of morocco
becausewe will be talking about
the contextualization
please yes this is a very interesting
question thank you when it comes to context
it means thatwe would like to deploy our
algorithms in very specific manner thatfit
withthe needs
of the population or the city or the
government i can give you one example it's
aboutlarge language
models there are two kind of contextualization
the first one is how to use large
language models
in some areas or withunder some infrastructure
constraints sowhen we we think about
for example
languages the existing models don't fit
really in the needs of the population in
africa
forexample
very few models tackle some rare languages
or some very specific languages by rare i
mean uh the
number of people using this language for
example in morocco we have arabic we can
speak fresh english
but we have amazir whichis language very
specific to morocco and
we need to contextualize the the
models andsometimes we have to rebuild
build the models in order to take into
account some very
specific structures of the language and
also data etc etc the second
contextualization context
solution i see is thatsometimes we have to
move fromlarge to small language models
becauseof
resources becauseof logistics
becausebecause of power computation etc so
i think we should
really be careful when
we want to use existing models in
particular that's the the advantage
of open source thatyou use existing
development by others so
we have to be enough aware of the
limits of reusing things andbe able to
adapt and
to contextualize this software to your
needs thank
that was uh not in the plan to end
thatthat quickly buti'm looking at you and
you have any
last message to the audience sure i'd want
to say in jamica AI adoption is gaining
momentum
but it's use of but
it's use of open source AI today is still
at the foundation building stage
not yet at scale development deployment
open source AI should therefore be
understood not only as
access to models our code butas a complete
ecosystem that
includes documentation transparency
security local adaptation standards and
skills development jamica has important
enablers in place including strong youth
talent through
our AI innovation lab at the university
of technology andlet me pause to say another
great example andi see the intel about
ceo is here
to make us started to introduce hackathons
andat our last hackathon we had when
we just started
we had like 150 the last hackathon was 750
young people turning out to spend a day
24 hours in one
location building solutions forthe forthe
problems thatthey see in the country so
we are pushing
the youth policy andalong withemergency
policy structures such as
the national AI task force
and a solid data protection framework
alongside investments in skills andresearch so
current
initiatives supported by international
partners such asa World Bank andthe IDB and
local institutions
are building are helping the build andthe
EU are helping to build this capacity
throughtraining
research collaboration and blended financing
models the direction of policies clear
strengthen domestic capability sothat
jamica can own cannot only use AI assistance
butalso
understand govern and
improve them over time ultimately success
will be measured by our ability
to move fromdependency to active
participation and
contribution within the global AI system
ecosystem so
jamica's message is simple open source AI
must build capability not dependency
it must help to serve citizens better
protect trust andcreate lasting jamica and
own value
thank you mr moderator thank you somuch
minister it was very exciting having you to
withus today
and in a very very informative to learn
aboutall the effort here and
i think this is how it
should be done thank you somuch for
coming your excellence is a little bit
please any closing remarks
no absolutely i think i would like to
close actually answering that
question around shared
infrastructure because i do believe if there
was any maybe message to leave here with
and it's really on thatis the opportunity
thatbecause i'm talking about
AI one of the biggest
things barriers towards out of soabout
data whenyou talk about
the infrastructure elements i think
that is very real forour region so
that's why shared infrastructure actually
provides us with
an amazing opportunity to be able to
potentially leapfrog and
decades in terms of our development
and our participation in the global AI
advancement and
i think it's critical one of the things
we're
working towards thatis to make this possible
becauseshared infrastructure there's so
many
other factors thatcomes intoit to to to
consider anddeal throughso for
example at the recently
concluded echos ICT council meeting one of
the things Sierra Leone was able to bring
to the table
was foractually for
us to develop a regional data embassy
framework this would ensure that
because we'll talk about
data one of the quickest things a lot of
would point to its issues of data
sovereignty right issues of sovereignty
where's my data stored WHO
has access to my data WHO's
utilizing my data how can i utilize it and
i think we look at the global space now i
think
more andmore countries want their data a
bit more closer to home sobut with
the understanding that
for estafica every country estafica can't
build their own infrastructure but
if we can develop
the policy andframework that
would allow us to take advantage of shared
infrastructure
we believe will put us way ahead of of of
thatour development andgoal so
this is really one of
the things thatwe're pushing this data
embassy framework to develop because
you believe it also
would enable us to attract investment to
develop infrastructure within the region
thatcould be
for the benefit andfor all of us sowe
believe as
of maybe a final piece towards it it's
also by
the way fits within the open source
andframework andfor open source infrastructure
somaybe that
should be another part of the conversations
around open source infrastructure
several and we were able to launch one of
the first op 5g open access network
in several and
so we know it's possible even within
private sector the idea to make it open
so within competition butstill it allows
you andthe opportunity and
to be able to leverage that
so big push towards thatwe're keen
andworking withour partners and
other regions we're keen
to learn lessons andfor what morocos is
doing from
what the jamaica is doing to what other
regions
are doing to really see how we can andtake
on board those lessons but
also look at how we can
collaborate andfor the benefits really of
all of us but
really looking forward to it thank you
thank you so much i think that minister
needs to leave very soon yeah
we want you to be on the picture meaning
we this is not very often thatwe have that
so we want to
be the picture soi i just have if you have
one minutes to forgiving us the keynotes
sowe can
pick thatpicture really very short one
minute so
i would like to in facache two things
the first one is something we didn't talk
aboutis governance governance is crucial
forAI but
also foropen source AI andsometimes in
many domains open data and
exchange of data may
clash with the protection of private data
and personal data and this is why in morocco
we propose some law not yet adopted by the
parliament but
on the way to make possible exchange of
data whilepreserving the protection of
personal data for
citizens the second point i would like
to emphasize is aboutthis idea that
using open source we can maybe improve the
explainability
of AI algorithms open source can be audited
and can allow us to open the black boxes
of AI algorithms andthis is something very
good butvery hard to do because
it it requires
very qualified talents to be able to
understand this open source because
opening source is not
enough people should be able to really
understand what to go what to understand
what's going on
and maybe the last thing i would like to
say is that
in morocco we play a very huge attention
to the talents to the to the training of
talents and
we also have a very big summer camp last
week
with one thousand seventy five people
building solution on AI for
ten sectors education health
agriculture governance etc and
i was really very impressed by the quality
of the solutions
proposed by this the young people between
20 and25 mostly and
i think the challenge was to
say what's going on after 70 years of AI
what is the new what's new what can we do
with this AI coming onto the table and the
the topic was to ask these young people
to provide new vision of AI 70 years after
the foundation of AI discipline and
it was really
fantastic andi will be very happy to share
with
you the outcomes of this experience one
week in
the desert of morocco thank you thank you
so
much next time invite me please be happy
to visit the
desert morocco your excelencies thank you
somuch forjoining the panel that
was the first
thing kind very very nice you show us the
way how we should do it andhope that
we see you next year
giving us more insights of how you have
successfully built this strategy big
applause
forall the
ministers thank you so
much let me just let me just say one thing
before we leave we have to
acknowledge just the adaptability and
readiness of our moderator
thank you very much whilst the picture is
being taken we keep hearing that
some of you cannot
hear andi feel like there's a joke in there
butit doesn't come to my mind right now
soif you
are having issues hearing or if you just
want to be closer to the stage we have some
empty
seats around here soespecially the ones in
the red seats feel free to come closer
andalso use
this as
an opportunity to maybe get up just stretch
a little bit um this is the last session
before
lunch andi feel like that's the infamous
thing to say to lose people's attention so
uh apologies
but i came up witha joke to keep your
attention here soit's time to talk about
the elephant in the
room whichi'm sure you've all seen it's
the robot in the room uh and
we will be moving on to the
session on open robots sopolice speakers
do come to the stage it's a bit snug there
butyou'll
have to get close and let me introduce you
to the moderator of the next session
thank you so much thank you so much
i see a lot of you moving down so it seems
to be working
yeah the French people actually the
session oh it's hard okay so
good to talk to you okay okay how is
i see there's a different name here do you
want to
let's turn them off yeah yeah because
there's something yeah we'll turn them off
more it more it more it
all right we see all right we are seeing a
lot of the people on stage and
we see people moving
closer that's great and it's lovely to see
it's lovely to see
hello it looks like my microphone died i
think that's definitely a sign i've spoken
too much so
let's hand it over to the panel so let me
introduce you to the moderator WHO will be
moderating the session so we have Lahari
Chautori from amazon web services WHO will be
introducing the session and introducing
the panelists over to you
good afternoon everyone thank you all for
being here today my name is Lahari
Chauturi i'm an
open source tpm focusing on artificial
intelligence and
machine learning at amazon web services
and today on the panel we'll be talking
aboutopen robots and
to get started open source
reshaped how we build software it reshaped
cloud infrastructure and
today it is reshaping
how we build artificial intelligence and
we are we are asking whether the same can
happen
for robotics andwhat thatactually requires
because
the robotic ecosystem is still deeply
fragmented
with proprietary stacks closed hardware
incompatible middleware building a robotic
system today still
means rebuilding things that
dozens of other teams have already solved
behind closed doors andthat's
very expensive andit also limits WHOgets
to participate globally and
this matters more now
than it did five years ago physical AI is
moving from research to reality very fast
and we are seeing how robots are entering
manufacturing health care agriculture and
many
other sectors the field is scaling and if
the underlying infrastructure stays closed
and whilethat happens the gap between
WHOcan build and
WHO cannot will only further widen
we have four panelists withus here today
WHOare building this future from
very different
vantage points over the next hour we'll be
going throughthe robotics value chain and
i'll let
the panelists introduce themselves briefly
hi everyone i'm matriela co-founder and
chief executive
officer of fondercraft andwondercraft is
building in this space so
we started building exoskeletons
which are robots to make people work again
andvery recently we we proposed that
technology to
build human weight robots um kind of the
ones that
you see here not this one um we do lagged
robots
and have recently entered intothe
industrial space througha partnership with
ronogroup
and and helping in manufacturing tasks
hello everyone my name is kristine fromAI
square robotics sofor those WHO
don't know us we are a
agi native general purpose robot company
andum fromshinjian china so
we build uh productivity
oriented uh general purpose robots sofrom
day one we're building robots witha brain
sowe're
building anduh invading the technology
andembody foundation model and
we're also designing the
most stable andreliable hardware platforms
forreal world deployments and
we're finding use cases
uh to have our robots get to work so
in fact we are very happy to be able to
bring our robots
here it's called the alphabots um souh
this is the generation of product that
we have already
achieved mass production andalso real
world deployments in manufacturing services
andpublic
service so
if you have a chance to come visit china
or come to shinjian uh you will find our
alphabots
working at some of the major parks
andshopping malls uh as
a retail service serving coffee and
ice cream uh on average of eight hours a
day making hundred cups of coffee and
ice cream without
errors um somy perspective today uh comes
from
bridging AI innovation to real world
deployments
as part of our commitment to making
intelligent robots forevery industry and
community around
the world we have launched the alphabrain
platform whichis an open source community
thatum for
embody intelligence thathelp researchers
and
developers to connect uh models data
training
and deployment all at once um so
we see in first hand how hardware is
rapidly uh advancing and
intelligent is still the bottleneck um
andour vision for
open sourcing our alphabrain is very
simple uh empowerment uh by providing a
shared foundation we want to lower barriers
to overcome
ecosystem fragmentation andto enable more
developers to participate and
innovate in embody AI so
we're very excited to join this discussion
andto talk about
how we can build a more accessible
robotic ecosystem together thanks yeah i'm
gary bratsky i'm uh entrepreneur and
basically
someone WHOjust gets things going souh i i
did open cv which
is the open source computer
vision library it's currently getting
abouthalf a billion downloads a year so
it's one of the
major pieces of of open source AI uh
software but
i took part in um winning the robotic race
uh
the DARPA Grant Challenge Stanley that
team became Waymo uh recently i funded um
space andg which
helped withthe first andso far only
successful commercial lunar landing that
was blue ghost
the last year um i'm i'm currently i was
with
bonsai robotics uh the AI have currently
switched to
advisor there we produce agricultural
robots both automating large tree-shaking
robots
andsmaller
ones forspecialty crops andfor mining but
now i'm back at stanford university at
their robotic
research center kind of looking at the
problem of home robotics andhow to get robots
foraging
support andand other things into
home like really rethinking how that's
going to happen andwhat
it would look like um starting for security
and entertainment um points of view
hello everyone my name is iming i'm the
vice president and
head of global operations for
robot tour androbotics at the stanjin
robot valley where
so we are building a global collaborative
and open source community forAI hardware
and
robotics in china our goal is to integrate
robust
supply chain capabilities withopen source
deployment standards providing a platform
forglobal teams
to efficiently build and
scale using china's manufacturing
ecosystem we warmly welcome everyone
to visit our community in Shenzhen thank
you okay thank you let's start with
the stack them
varies openness proving most effective
today across the robotics stack and
weightless adoption
remain limited is open source in robotics
primarily driven by software or are we
starting to see
meaningful openness in hardware
andmanufacturing as
well go ahead carry yeah okay um so
you know robotics there there's been a lot
of advance with
the AI models typically using
vlms vision language models andand and
also like beyond lacun earlier he's
pushing the jepa
models those are having some impact buti
mean the software is not quite there yet
butit does
open up this possibility for
again somewhat like on the flip side of
what yon said like well it's
a AI is a universal mediator so
it should be done universally right now
hardware is done by
people of the money or the infrastructure
fordoing the manufacture but
if we had truly capable open
source models thatare say capable of of
getting a model and
actuating anything then hardware can
start to be bespoke they're produced
forcertain situations for
instance even to the level of
your particular kitchen there could be a
robot thatfits it best and
if it if the software is there
that can actuate it then we could have a
different kind of industry where
you get some you get some
motors or whatever thatactuate andthen 3d
print parts and
you'd have a robot that's meant for
that environment or forthat or or more
appropriate forthat as
society it also solves problems of
how do you maintain these systems complex
like humanoid robots will need a lot of
maintaining
and how do you fix things in the field
well if you can produce most of the parts
near the source
then you can fix andmaintain yeah I agree
with
Gary I think we already have a lot of open
resources
that we get access to and
it's genuinely getting lowering the
barrier to get started on robotics
but the challenge is really aboutthe
problem is about
fragmentation we're building this type of
technology with
different data formats different model
architecture different stimulation
environments
and different benchmark so
even if things were open it's incredibly
difficult to reproduce
someone's results andcompare the system
fairly andalso take froma research paper and
putting it
deploying intothe real world sothat's why
asour company whenwe think about
open source our goal
is to connect the dots to bring thatdata
model training andevaluation and
deployment all in the
one coherent framework andwe believe that
open source should not just open up
individual
components but it should give the whole
community a shared foundation to build on
in our view the most important word in
robotics is deployment andyou are talking
aboutimpact
the only way to have impact in the real
world is to deploy actual robots and
if you look at where
open source has been historically successful
you have software like open tv which
as Gary said is
is incredible I think it's been widely
used in academics as
well you have robot blueprints that
can be built in every university every
college andit's it's doing well I think where
it's not
being able to crack the anything yet is in
real world or industrial deployment and
when you think
about why whenan industrial player is
deploying a robot they are looking for
a couple of things
up time sohow reliable the system is
through
puts our cycle time how effective it is to
get
the job done andthen of course our price
andthe thing is I think from
from their perspective
they don't want software or hardware they
want a system that
someone can stand behind in terms of
responsibility andbecause at the end of the
day if the if andwhen the robot fails as
as was said
they are going to have a problem andthey
need to have someone thatcan be accountable
forthat
I think that's where open source needs to
progress or find its ways maybe to think
in terms of system or systems rather than
a single brick otherwise it's gonna remain
limited in its
adoption in the real world okay building
on math is point many robotics innovations
succeed in
labs but
they struggle in real world environments
what are the main barriers to deployment at
scale
that we're seeing today yeah so so I think
reliability is is one of the key points um
up time cycle time andand these machines
are either very simple and
then their deployment is
contained to simple tasks or they are very
complex andcomplicated and
then we are not yet at the
level where we can deploy them them in the
general context so for example in our view
robots will not scale becausethey are
general they will become general because
they scale
meaning that's we take the approach of
deploying robots on well-defined use cases
like moving
boxes or moving tires or things thatare
still very difficult to to deploy reliably
butmanageable
with today's technology andand as
we get more robots out there in the real
world we gather more
data thatcan improve our models andextend
the variability of the environments where
they're
able to perform yeah um building on math
is points um the yeah the barriers between
labs andthe real world andlabs everything
is controlled but
in the world world everything
is changing all the time you have the
lighting if the object the workflow uh people
working around
it these are all the uncontrolled elements
andum the bar forreliability stability
andsafety
is much higher in real world settings andalso
in productivity demanding scenarios so
the robots
can't just work once it has to work every
single time consistently so
we believe the key is to build
a closed loop between real world deployment
andmodel iteration stimulation helps but
we do need
real tasks real environments andreal users
um and
at ASR what if we treat commercial
deployment
as part of the learning process so
the robots generate operational data the
data helps improve
our model andthe better model also helps
with
um the next deployment to be more robust
uh sowe
believe that
real world produce real intelligence um we
think there's a couple reasons why
there's
a barrier one is becausethe factory
environment is flawless but
the real world is unproofed
predictable it's kind of like what Massey
was saying two is becausethe time and
scale is very
different three is because
the economics of the value uh value chain
is different uh we believe
being the cluster hub of the supply chain
is very important
I just wanted to add the financial support
and I don't know how you would
do this butum obviously I do open CV and
it's probably you know saved billions of
dollars in
software development andyet you know we we
get approximately zero uh back fordoing
thatand yet
have to run this organization I wonder if
like at at some some level of scale of an
industry so
they're successful they're making millions
that
they have they pay some kind of open
source tax
and that's paid out on the radio um song
play model if open source if a certain open
source is
used a lot it gets a proportion of thatmoney
andmaybe some is also set aside for
new innovation
thank you the deployment picture today
assumes current robots but
AI is changing what they
do how is the integration of AI in terms
of perception reasoning and
autonomy changing what
robots can do in real world environments
it's it's definitely changing a lot
especially in terms of
flexibility andand the number of tasks
thatyou can consider sonow that
you have vision
perception and
models to be able to analyze the
environment it's actually credible to deploy
robots that are going to evolve with their
environment meaning that's in manufacturing
operations you use to deploy um fixed arm
robots solike six doves robot that
could do a single task
and it would take six months to deploy
those robots and
it would take a lot of engineers andand
PhDs to configure them and
once they were deployed they would do one
single thing again andagain
and again andnow withmobile robots you can
imagine a world where
you deploy robots way faster because
you don't need the same level of expert
operator training and
whenever the manufacturing floor or
the environment changes you can repurpose
or retarget or retask the robot to this
new environment and
this these new constraints soit could be
the parts or the piece that
the robot is interacting with
that does change like sodon't it's not a
motor it's a gear or it's not that
panel it's this part it
used to be very complex to adapt robots to
new requirements and
it's going to be increasingly
easier now we shouldn't sell dreams i think
um there are still a lot of progress to
be made
and especially in terms of of reliability
andthis is why we we have this idea that
robots will
become general becausethey scale meaning
that
they will increasingly address a larger uh
more
complex environment yeah so
i'll say like uh a lot of traditional
robotics they're very sophisticated
instruction followers soyou give them a
very clear control environment with
a fixed set of tasks
they would do it perfectly butthe moment
whensomething changes it fails to adapt and
that's
what's just changing with
the RISE of foundation model uh instead of
programming programming the
robots with
a long list of rules you're giving it
ability to perceive the physical world
reasoned
and act in a more flexible way souh take
forexample when
uh the last time you bought like a new
coffee machine you're not gonna go
straight to the user menu and
redo line to line you're probably
gonna play around withit uh look at it
recognize some familiar patterns and
figure it out along
the way sothat's kind of like knowledge
transfer and
the robots are starting to develop these
capabilities andum our vision is to build
robot intelligence that
works similar to human brain
dust not by adding more rules buthave uh
developed deeper understanding and
that is what will move
robots frompure automation to genuine
adaptability and
that's also uh what make it possible to
deploy
these robots faster and across far more
industry and use cases than ever before
yeah so there's obviously the the world or
most places in the world are already
deeply into aging and uh not replacing the
population so there's an obvious need for
you know the potential robot labor um at
at Stanford one of the things i'm looking
at is
aging and
as one of the example robots of how to do
this how the robots you know help out an
aging population forexample as
one area of deployment is the japanese
toilet it's uh it's a robot it
it's kind of a medical device that's not
very attractive it's forfor people WHO
lost the ability
to wipe themselves butinstead it's it's
sold asa high um high luxury good that
people aspire for
rather than this kind of sickly medical
device soi kind of use that
as an inspiration that
how do you get robots in the home well you
want them assomething not as
a sad robotic dog that
pretends to uh to be your friend butbut
for
example if if we can get them in the house
in a safe way
and i'm looking at ambient environments
that
like make make the robot brain or world
model the
entire space to make it more safe butin
that
the robots would obviously have some
utility like a
security the security system function but
such robots could then um enable embodied
entertainment
like like if you knew the movie the show
west world there are those robots that
have an intelligence
and play a role butthat could be brought
and
generalized instead of some pretend
companion
they're character in a story thatyou're
involved in whenyou're being entertained but
they're also
that same thing when
you want to be educated or cognitively
helped how to cook how to whatever
so this is a way a friendly way of uh and
a useful way of robots entering you know
the home
environment thatstarts to mediate um the
aging society and
of course you know this can be carried
across to factories andwhatever butthis is
just the focus now and
they can start helping with
health care like there are very things
that
aren't scaling well in any society
education
because it's an old school model of of some
dictatorial lecturer speaking at people
which
doesn't really suit people so
so like a home entertainment robot can do
using AI bespoke
education forwhere you're at finding what
your gaps are andand and
teaching you in an individualized
way it can also be forhealth monitoring
your questions butalso for
exercise you know like
exercises a game rather than it is asa
task i don't have too much to add but
i think in general
it allows the AI to leave the safe lab
environment and
entering the wild world at same time allow
more people to be involved in the
interaction withAI so
we're happy to see this happens
i think there's also something that's
interesting to becausewe all talk aboutllms
andand foundation
models andhow this can enhance robotics
and
i'm just like everyone in the room to
think i'm sure
everyone in the room does use llms like in
any shape or form andinteract with
them on daily basis
and if you think aboutyour experience i
think how often the answer that
you got was completely
completely missing the mark like doing
something a little bit crazy saying something
was the wrong
color or are completely wrong and
this happens very infrequently like maybe
every one one percent
of the time or even less andit's okay
because
there is a human in the loop that's able
to mediate
the answer andto understand when
to just disregard the answer now in
robotics it may not be exactly
the same becauseif there's a robot that
falls one times every hundred times this
is not something
that you can disregard this can actually
be catastrophic or if one times one out of
hundred
times it empties your fridge instead of
replenishing it that's going to be
catastrophic
aswell for
adoption so
we also have to think in terms of impacting
the real world of physical AI versus
llms andand andand frontier models andi
think that's something that
sometimes is overlooked
thank you that's really a great context to
understand what the technology can do
right now
but what does it take to build a competitive
robotics ecosystem at the national or
regional
level today can open robotics meaningfully
enable participation from
emerging economies or do
structural barriers such as cost and
infrastructure remain too high
that it it just reminds me like of one of
the things forscaling robotics and
one of the missing
parts is simulation now many people have
simulators and cosmos is recent by NVIDIA
there's still hard to use and resource
intensive as far as the the compute but
it is an enabler andlike forscaling things
for
instance the auto industry there's now a
lot of
autonomous driving they have a Tesla it's
driving and
and many other cars spreading around the
world
but one would hope andthis would take a
government action that
any accident of any car that's
autonomous should be reported intoa national
database wherethat becomes simulated
andthen
that becomes the software requirements
that
before you deploy new autonomous software
it should pass
all these accidents thathave ever happened
to anyone's car anywhere and
you know then we have a
rising level of safety butthe same is true
in factories andhomes that
if we if we have these
open general databases asa aslike a level
that
you must pass then we get increasing
capability and
safety so
our perspective regarding this question is
there are two things very very important
one is
high density supply chain is essential
secondly is the collaboration with
global talent is really
important soour core standpoint is fromis
from
our team's practice in Shenzhen robot
valley i want
talk a little bit about
Shenzhen robot valley the unique value
value of Shenzhen robot valley is
which it owns over 200 robotic enterprises
and
that's three kilometers four closed group
components supply chain so
they solve the universal global pain point
of inefficient high cost
hardware development fortech teams
worldwide yeah and
i also wanted to add to answer that
question i think open source alone it's not
enough you can release the most powerful
model in the
world butif it requires a massive compute
cluster and
team of specialized engineers then in
practice
is still only accessible to a small number
of well resource organization so
for a lot of researchers
startups university especially in our
developing economies the barrier is not
talents i think
there we find brilliant people everywhere
and
the barrier is access to access to compute
to
infrastructures to tools thatlet you
actually do something withthe technology and
it is not
just aboutmaking the codes available butit
is genuinely lowering lowering the bar so
that a team
anywhere in the world working on problems
that
matters to their own communities can
actually get
started i think to build a ecosystem you
first need clients that's the first thing
that's going to
drive progress and
innovation people willing to to get one of
their problems solved basically
and then the question is what are these
problems soyou need to identify use cases
whererobotics
today not in ten years but today can already
bring value and and you can deploy robots
and after thatof course you need academics
you need great teams you need talent and
and compute
and you need to have all of these together
for ecosystems to meaningfully take shape
just wanted to say that
i love the idea of having a shared
database of of um accidents andand
issues becauseit's true thatonce you have
thatyou have automatically safety levels
thatthat RISE
like that's structural i think it comes
with
a lot of complexities in terms of
simulation because
you may be able to simulate a lot of
software issues andand andand problems but
i think it's
going to be way harder to recreate the
hardware conditions that
led to this to these um possible
accidents soi'd love to understand how you
think about
that in terms of how to create something
that's representative or helpful forall
manufacturers well i mean one model for
this is something like
Carla is an open source driving simulator
thatwas developed outside of nvity but
now they support it
and one could like just report the
accidents and
again you need it takes a model the CAD
model of
whatever of the car andthen it simulates
the physics to some level of fidelity and
that
that varies depending on the situation but
but i mean you could build this in all the
areas that
you want to do this in if it's some kind
of manufacturing robot you provide a model
andyou provide
whatever the sensing was andand set up the
situation that
led to the accident or whatever
this would also you know potentially be a
repository of just data for
other people to train andbuild
their own systems or fine-tune them one
barrier that keeps surfacing is fragmentation
and thatis thatplatforms do not talk to
each other well how much of that
fragmentation across
platforms and standards is slowing the
robotics sector today
i mean in one sense you have fragmentation
which
is sort of natural different companies
have their
proprietary systems the one thing you do
have though is data and
so if there is a way of collecting
and sharing data than other people it at
least it theoretically prevents lockout
thatsomeone
owns everything if there's enough data
thatsomeone can recreate and
and retrain a model
that you know to become competitive then
you never have that kind of lock-in
yeah i don't know if fragmentation is such
a big issue because
in every industry you have
a number of actors andthey all compete and
and in a way this drives innovation if you
look at cars
all cars are different and and proprietary
and and it's never prevented anyone from
like driving number of cars i think what
cars have is a shared infrastructure
and whenwhen we think abouthuman robotics
we think of infrastructure because
we believe
it's going to be relevant to all kind of
industries andand ultimately health care
andthen home
so i think the question is more how do you
have a shared infrastructure that's a low
all these
fragmented players to compete or be used
rather than some big conglomerate or our
model police
that have never been good forinnovation i
just want to add from
the perspective of the of the
operation cost the idea of high custom
integration tax without deployment standards
is high
the cost is over the hardware itself so we
should be able to pay attention to this
okay what role could open standards play
in unlocking interoperability across
systems
andmarkets
um yeah i think that's that's an interesting
um point because when we look at robots
it's not the same thing asas LLMs again
andwe've all seen what happened with
the anthropic
issue a couple days ago a week ago and
it's not such a big deal because in a way
everyone was able to reconnect their
systems to another model and
and that's the beauty of API
it's not the same thing withphysical
systems because
once you have a million robots deployed
in all the infrastructure of a country or
our region and
suddenly someone has a button that
they can push andthat freezes all these
robots it's not aseasy as
just writing another line of
code andsaying okay now we are using
another API no the robots are there and
they cannot be
changed thateasily now withopen source
standards and
an interoperability this may be a little
bit
easier but
the the problem will the problem there will
always remain a physical element thatis
going to be hard to overcome yeah uh today
the real interoperability the challenge
is uh delay
the AI layer souh talk aboutwhether different
models can work withthe same data and
uh can you
take stimulation environments built by one
team anduse it to test a model that
is built by
another and
can you actually compare results across a
different system in a meaningful way
and uh right now the answer to most of
thatquestion is no so
that's a serious problem and
there's no common standard at the level
the ecosystem is still fragmented but
we'd love to see
how open standard can create a genuine
shared foundation soum not just sothings that
can
technically be connected but
also the whole community can move towards
uh forward together
more efficiently and transparently I want
to probably abuse the common standards
thing here to to think aboutlabor and
it's just an idea I want to push since
we're in the
you end asthere's this idea of like okay
what happens when
robots are are ubiquitous are they
gonna you know cause the lack of work
andand whatever andand what's suggested for
this is
is like a standard universal basic income
whichI think is the wrong thing to do
becauseit turns
people intobeggars andrather I I'd press
the notion of universal ownership so
let's say government
or governments attacks a corporation on a
share of their ownership this is mixed
intoa mutual
fund anddistributed to the population
sothis is a open standard for
a better way of doing income
that converts the population into owners
not beggars
okay coming to our last question in which
areas may open source approaches face
limitations in
robotics andwhat role should governments
andpublic sectors play in supporting safe
andscalable
open robotics systems again just to abuse
things forfun I'm I'm more for
replacing governments I'm
not very happy with
any government on earth I think they're
all kind of underperforming or severely
underperforming what if the the AI and
the robotics was also you could swap out
at least part of your
taxes andwhatever for
the government of your choice you would be
under their rules giving money
and they'd be delivering services andnow
we'd have a huge competition for
WHO's going to deliver the
best government but
it's a different topic sorry I think the
most valuable role government can play
is asa ecosystem builder there are things
thatare genuinely hard for
any single company to build
on its own stay for
safety standards data governance framework
share testing environments long-term
fundamental research support these are
public good and
historically the technological ecosystem
has had the most lasting impact wherethe
ones are wheregovernments have been and
build that
cannot share foundation early sothe goal
should be healthy open ecosystem where
innovation can
happen broadly yeah I think the number one
thing that
drives companies are their clients now
governments are one of the largest
entities in the world and
so by logic they should be the one
with the largest problems actually that's
what I hear on my right so
so the number one thing that
they can do is to become clients of of
robotics today sothat they can shape where
those companies
are going andwhat kind of products they
develop because
at the end of the day that's what
companies
do they listen to their clients hopefully
they should and
and governments have the ability to
become large clients of those companies I
think there are two things governments
should do one
is encouraging the regional manufacturing
density two is invest in invest in
foundational open source
in foreign structure both software and
hardware standards that's what we see in
Shenzhen robot
valley okay do we have any questions from
the audience
hello maybe I can use this microphone so
my name is Nico Carlera I'm the gak chair
at icon sorry and
I have a question forthe forthe
distinguished lady from
China you refer to fragmentation asa
somehow negative thing don't you think my
question is wouldn't it be actually
beneficial at the end
of the day in terms of having different
approaches to whatever problem there is on
the table yes when
I talk aboutfragmentation was talking more
aboutbuilding some basic layers andtools
forresearchers
and developers to start get their hands
started in the same starting point less than
having I think
what you're referring to is having many
different players in the market different
type of products
which I think is amazing andbut what we're
seeing now within about
a eyes that's a lot of these
building these in body a foundation model
is not aboutcoming up with
a clever algorithm but
it is aboutfreeing the engineers fromcontinue
to building the infrastructure so
providing all the
baseline tools forthem to get started
withthis technology and
making it more accessible for
them sothis is kind of what I was
referring to withthe fragmentation but
I think having different
players andcoming at robotics andby AI
fromdifferent angle is very healthy for
the market and
for different use cases andapplication
andthis is what we also wanted to build with
this ecosystem
is to empower different players to come
in. Anybody else?
Hello my name is Yveson fromthe open
source hardware association and
to the panel I wonder
there is a lot of talk aboutscaling robots
using them in multiple situations such as
in the home
and industry what do you think the level
of technical literacy is going to need to
be
such thatwe can actually deploy robots in
not just research labs and
things of their nature butin
actual everyday situations such as
being in the home you know maybe working
at a mechanic shop
something like that
and how do you see open source like the
open source of these robots of their
designs things of thatnature either aiding
or complicating that
ability to reach a necessary
level of technical literacy?
I guess there's the technical literacy for
building and developing
these systems and then for using it and as
you see most software is pretty bad at being
usable I can't remember yeah I got the
Tesla and it has a vent icon and it's gray
does thatmean the vents closed or is it
open when
you press it it turns white does that
mean it's now open or did I just close the
vent it I mean that's just an example of
like stupid
API design with robots I assume you're
going to have the same kind of problems and
you know like if we have more open models
maybe more people can feed into
just better design
more intuitive obviously if they can
demonstrate their use or one of the big
advantages of LLMs
is simply using natural language to
explain things rather than this cumbersome
interface I could
just say I want the vents open you know
it's easier and
that's how we evolved to describe
things so maybe with the language model
that becomes the universal interface
We'll take one last question hi my name is
Chiamaka Fermi Adenka I'm here
I'm a PhD candidate at some Houston State
University in Texas my research focuses on
AI assisted crime scene investigations and
my question is do you envision robots
being deployed
to assist law enforcement investigators to
document crime scenes to look at evidence
to
make investigation easier forthem and
also what are the policy barriers or the
technical barriers
you see that make this a reality thank you
I think that's probably one of the last
thing that will happen because we would
talk about robots that are enabled or
authorized to exert force and
violence on other human beings otherwise
they wouldn't be particularly
helpful soI think thatthat's probably the
last step if it happens at all andI knew
thatthere
was a few years ago there was an experiment
by the NYPD with the Boston Dynamics
dog andI think they will draw the
experiment becausethere was a safe world for
the dog or
something that's bad guys could just use
to stop the dog because
of course the robot needs a safe
world andso soyou run intoall kinds of
problems whenyou do that
so in our view robots will
first be deployed to help people rather
than to exert violence on them and
there are a lot of
topics and and subjects where we all need
help for physical help in health care
on their kind of help andthat's I think
wherewe should focus as
the robotics community I just
wanted to I worked early at Willow Garage
wherewe were developing early robots and
I think robots
are going to help the crime not the law
enforcement because
we once locked ourselves out of the
building andwe just teleopt the robot
fromthe inside to open the door well that
just defeated
the whole building security system but
I would imagine the first use would be in
violent situations
that a robot can go in you know andand
risk its life instead of a human's life and
in helping
prevent things butI imagine like anything
else humans do it it's a two-edged sword
andthere'll
be rich new areas forcriminals to explore
okay we are all at time now and
it's lunch break so
let me pull some key points together fromthe
panel sowhat we're all taking away from
this
conversation is thatrobotics value chain
is still fragmented at different levels but
that
but that does not limit us because we are
we also have open source and we have heard
the panelists speak about
how open source can actually help us to
build open robots but
there are some key points that were also
highlighted by the panelists how we require
governments to build national databases
thatcould record AI accidents andthen that
could
become a potential ecosystem forthe
builders and
also be an ecosystem builder at the same
time
and also support the regional manufacturers
andsupport the open source hardware and
software ecosystems
the work thatis being done by not only by
the panelists and
everybody in the room matters a lot
right now becauserobotics will reshape
labor health care mobility and
economic opportunity
within next decade whether the transformation
is broadly shared or narrowly captured
depends
totally in part on the choices we make
aboutopenness now andthank you somuch and
thank you
to all our panelists for being here thank
you
thank you somuch to the speakers moderator
and
all of the speakers have moderators from
this morning i know i'm your least
favorite person in the room because
it's only me between you and
lunch butwe have a slide thatwe must show
you andplease take a photo of it and
it will be
giving you information about the breakout
sessions that are taking place after lunch
and since we give you two hours forlunch
we assume that
this information will be lost in the
meanwhile soi see a lot of cameras out
that's great sojust for
information if you're looking
for the conference rooms those are in the
basement soyou go to one bee okay and
we have the volunteers
WHO are around in the yellow shirts and
they can guide you if you're lost um i'm
in here forless
than a year andi'm still lost every day
soyou're not the only ones and
then there's the ECOSOC
chamber andthat's the room we're in right
now soif you're attending that
session you can come back
here andas i mentioned in the morning
please take your things with
you otherwise we're going to
be in trouble withsecurity sotake your
bags take your belongings go for
lunch you have two hours
so you can obviously go outside butwe have
a cafeteria on the fourth floor and
then there's also
food in the basement in the cafeteria so
sorry that's the cafe cafeteria fourth
floor cafe first
floor all right you're free to go see you
back here at 415 thank you